http://scienceofdiet.com/past-week-april-28-may-5-2017/	
This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:
Low vitamin B12 intake during infancy may affect intelligence and brain function later in childhood.
High lead levels in childhood may impair intelligence and socioeconomic status in adulthood.
Fish oil or evening primrose oil may reduce the symptoms of arthritis.
New Research From Around the World
Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Brain and Mental Health
Liver Health
Lung Health
Bone Health
Arthritis
Blood
Sleep
1. Obesity and Weight Loss
Impact of High-Carbohydrate Diet on Metabolic Parameters in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes.
This review concluded that high-carb diets are as effective as low-carb diets at reducing body weight, blood sugar levels and LDL cholesterol levels in people with type 2 diabetes.
However, high-carb diets can raise triglyceride levels and reduce levels of beneficial HDL cholesterol, potentially increasing the risk of heart disease. However, these effects can be ameliorated by eating carbs that have a low glycemic index.
Dietary intake and adipose tissue content of long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and subsequent 5-y change in body weight and waist circumference.
This prospective observational study in 29,152 adults showed that the intake of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids was not consistently associated with changes in body weight or waist circumference.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
High folate and low vitamin B12 status during pregnancy is associated with gestational diabetes mellitus.
This observational study in pregnant, Asian women found that high folate levels, in combination with insufficient vitamin B12 levels, were associated with a 97% higher risk of diabetes during pregnancy (GDM).
High folate levels without vitamin B12 insufficiency were linked to higher blood sugar levels and a 29% higher risk of GDM. In contrast, high vitamin B12 levels were associated with lower blood sugar levels.
Legume consumption is inversely associated with type 2 diabetes incidence in adults: a prospective assessment from the PREDIMED study.
This prospective observational study in 3,349 adults found that eating a lot of legumes was associated with a reduced risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Specifically, those who ate the most legumes had a 35% lower risk of developing T2D. The researchers observed a similar association when they investigated lentil consumption separately.
Childhood body mass index and development of type 2 diabetes throughout adult life—A large-scale Danish cohort study.
This observational study in 292,827 people showed that children whose body mass index was above average were more likely to develop type 2 diabetes as adults. This association was stronger among women than men.
A retrospective analysis of a societal experiment among the Danish population suggests that exposure to extra doses of vitamin A during fetal development may lower type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) risk later in life.
This Danish observational study showed that adults whose mothers had eaten vitamin A-enriched margarine during pregnancy were at a lower risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
Serum magnesium and the risk of prediabetes: a population-based cohort study.
This observational study in 8,555 adults with normal blood sugar levels found that reduced magnesium levels were linked to an 18% and 12% increased risk of diabetes and prediabetes, respectively.
The authors concluded that magnesium levels may interact with genes that are associated with the risk of diabetes.

3. Heart Health
Antioxidant response to artichoke leaf extract supplementation in metabolic syndrome: A double-blind placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial.
High levels of oxidized LDLs have been linked to an increased risk of heart disease. They’re also used as a marker of oxidative stress, which is associated with several chronic diseases.
This controlled study in 68 people with metabolic syndrome showed that taking 1,800 mg of artichoke leaf extract for three months reduced levels of oxidized LDLs, compared to a placebo containing cornstarch and lactose.
25-Hydroxyvitamin D and blood pressure: a plateau effect in adults with African ancestry living at different latitudes.
This observational study in 2,242 young adults with African ancestry showed that blood pressure tended to increase when vitamin D levels were low. Blood pressure was the highest when circulating vitamin D levels fell below 20 ng/ml.
Cashew consumption reduces total and LDL cholesterol: a randomized, crossover, controlled-feeding trial.
This 28-day crossover study in 51 adults aged 21–73 compared the effects of eating 28–64 grams of cashew nuts or potato chips per day, while keeping the total intake of carbs, protein and fat constant between groups.
Compared to potato chips, cashew nut intake significantly improved the blood lipid profile by reducing total cholesterol, non-HDL cholesterol and the ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol.
A pro-inflammatory diet is associated with increased risk of developing hypertension among middle-aged women.
This 12-year observational study followed 7,169 Australian women who were 52 years old when the study started.
The study showed that following a pro-inflammatory diet was associated with a greater risk of developing high blood pressure (hypertension).

4. Cancer
Effect of Vitamin D and Calcium Supplementation on Cancer Incidence in Older Women.
This four-year controlled study in 2,303 healthy, postmenopausal women aged 55 and older showed that taking daily vitamin D (2000 IU) and calcium (1,500 mg) supplements did not lower the risk of cancer, compared to a placebo.

5. Brain and Mental Health
Vitamin B-12 status in infancy is positively associated with development and cognitive functioning 5 y later in Nepalese children.
This observational study in Nepalese children found that low vitamin B12 levels in infancy were associated with the poor development of several cognitive functions that were measured when the children were five years old.

Effect of long-term omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation with or without multidomain intervention on cognitive function in elderly adults with memory complaints (MAPT): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial.
This three-year controlled study in 1,680 older French adults with memory problems investigated the effects of taking daily omega-3 supplements, which provided 800 mg of DHA and 225 mg of EPA, on cognitive function.
The study showed that long-chain omega-3 supplements had no significant effects on cognitive decline, compared to a placebo.
Childhood Blood Lead Levels, Cognitive Function, and Socioeconomic Status in Adulthood.
Lead is a heavy metal that is toxic to neurons. Consumption of lead-contaminated food leads to its accumulation in body tissues and may cause health problems.
This prospective observational study in 1,007 young people from New Zealand showed that high circulating lead levels at age 11 were linked to a lower IQ, cognitive function and socioeconomic status at age 38.

6. Liver Health
Synbiotic supplementation in lean patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a pilot, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trial.
Synbiotics (SB) are supplements containing both probiotics and prebiotics. This study examined the effects of SB on the symptoms of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
The study included 50 adults with NAFLD and normal or low BMI. It found that supplementing with SB for seven months improved liver health and lowered fasting blood sugar, triglyceride levels and several inflammatory markers.

7. Lung Health
Effects of Fruit and Vegetable Consumption on Risk of Asthma, Wheezing and Immune Responses: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
This meta-analysis concluded that a high intake of fruits and vegetables may reduce the severity of asthma. A high intake of vegetables was also associated with a lower risk of asthma.
The anti-inflammatory effects of fruits and vegetables seem to be responsible. Studies show that they may protect against lung inflammation.

8. Bone Health
The effect of dairy intake on bone mass and body composition in early pubertal girls and boys: a randomized controlled trial.
This was a controlled study in 240 healthy children and adolescents aged 8–16 who consumed low amounts of dairy and less than 800 mg of calcium per day.
The study showed that eating three daily servings of dairy, providing about 900 mg of calcium, had no significant effects on bone mineral density or body composition, compared to a placebo.

9. Arthritis

Clinical Benefits of n-3 PUFA and ɤ-Linolenic Acid in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disorder that affects the joints. It’s characterized by inflamed, swollen and painful joints, most commonly in the hands.
This 12-week controlled study in 60 adults with RA showed that taking fish oil or evening primrose oil supplements significantly reduced self-assessed symptoms of RA, such as tender joints, compared to a placebo.

10. Blood
Fish oil LC-PUFAs do not affect blood coagulation parameters and bleeding manifestations: analysis of 8 clinical studies with selected patient groups on omega3-enriched medical nutrition.
One of the concerns associated with a high intake of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids (LC n-3) or fish oil is their blood-thinning effect, which may increase the risk of bleeding.
However, this review of eight studies found no evidence of changes in blood coagulation values or an increased bleeding risk with the use of LC n-3, even when 1.5 grams were taken daily for a year or at short-term doses of 10 grams per day.

11. Sleep

Plasma Vitamin D Deficiency Is Associated With Poor Sleep Quality and Night-Time Eating at Mid-Pregnancy in Singapore.
This observational study in 890 pregnant women from Singapore found that vitamin D deficiency was linked to a higher risk of poor sleep quality and night-time eating, compared to women who had sufficient vitamin D levels.
This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Probiotic supplements may improve blood sugar control in diabetic pregnant women.
Probiotic supplements before a liver transplant may reduce the risk of infection following the procedure.
Kidney transplant recipients are often deficient in vitamin B6, but the deficiency doesn’t appear to be caused by a poor dietary intake.
Replacing dietary glucose or sucrose with fructose lowers blood sugar levels in people with diabetes, without appearing to have any adverse health effects.
New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Brain and Mental Health
Kidney and Urinary Health
Muscles and Physical Performance
Growth
Infections and Immune Health
Longevity and Healthy Aging
Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Alpha-lipoic acid supplement in obesity treatment: A systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials.

Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) is a fatty acid and antioxidant that’s sold as a weight loss supplement. In addition to being produced by your body, it is found in almost all food, especially organ meats, spinach and broccoli.

This meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that ALA supplements may cause a slight weight loss.

Maternal dietary intakes of refined grains during pregnancy and growth through the first 7 y of life among children born to women with gestational diabetes.

This prospective observational study in 918 Danish mothers and their children found that a high intake of refined grains during pregnancy made the children more likely be overweight or obese at age seven.

The risk was greater among children who were breastfed for less than six months. All of the participating mothers had diabetes during pregnancy.

Yogurt consumption, body composition, and metabolic health in the Québec Family Study.

This observational study in 839 Canadian adults found that those who regularly consumed yogurt had a lower waist circumference, body mass index, body fat percentage and insulin levels.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Chronic fructose substitution for glucose or sucrose in food or beverages has little effect on fasting blood glucose, insulin, or triglycerides: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

The health effects of fructose are controversial, and studies have reported conflicting findings. This review and meta-analysis of controlled studies examined the health benefits of replacing glucose or sucrose in food and beverages with fructose.

The study concluded that replacing glucose and sucrose may slightly lower fasting blood sugar, triglycerides and body weight in some people, especially those who have type 2 diabetes.

Fructose replacement of glucose or sucrose in food or beverages lowers postprandial glucose and insulin without raising triglycerides: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

This meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that replacing dietary glucose or sucrose with fructose led to a significantly lower peak blood sugar and insulin levels after meals, especially in diabetic people.

Although previous studies suggest that excessive fructose intake may adversely affect the blood lipid profile, the replacement didn’t increase triglyceride levels. The potential adverse effects of fructose are probably dose-dependent.

Impact of breakfast skipping compared with dinner skipping on regulation of energy balance and metabolic risk.

This crossover study found that skipping either breakfast or dinner for one day increased the number of calories burned, compared to eating three main meals per day.

However, the study also showed that breakfast skipping increased insulin levels after eating, as well as fat oxidation (fat burning). Further studies need to investigate the long-term effects of meal skipping.

Effect of Probiotics on Metabolic Outcomes in Pregnant Women with Gestational Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.

This review and meta-analysis of four high-quality, controlled studies concluded that probiotic supplements may benefit women who suffer from diabetes during pregnancy.

Specifically, taking probiotic supplements for 6–8 weeks significantly improved insulin sensitivity. In contrast, the probiotics had no significant effects on weight gain or birth outcomes.

3. Heart Health

Energy drinks and atrial fibrillation in young adults.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a type of abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) that’s characterized by fast or irregular heartbeats. It is a risk factor for stroke and heart attacks.

This review of observational studies concluded that a high intake of energy drinks may trigger AF in young people, especially when combined with alcoholic drinks.

4. Cancer

Alcohol Intake and Breast Cancer Risk in African American Women from the AMBER Consortium.

Alcohol intake is a well-known risk factor for breast cancer. This study in 22,338 African-American women showed that consuming seven or more alcoholic drinks per week was linked to an increased risk of breast cancer.

5. Brain and Mental Health

The association between an inflammatory diet and global cognitive function and incident dementia in older women: The Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study.

The Dietary Inflammatory Index (DII) rates the inflammatory potential of a diet. Some foods are pro-inflammatory, whereas others are anti-inflammatory or neutral.

This prospective observational study in 7,085 women aged 65–79 found that following a diet with a high pro-inflammatory potential was associated with an increased risk of mild cognitive impairment or dementia.

Abdominal Adiposity is Associated with Higher Levels of Depression Severity, Cognitive Impairment and Markers of Inflammation and Insulin Resistance.

This observational study in 7,794 adults found that abdominal obesity was associated with an increased risk of depression.

Among those who were depressed, increased abdominal fat was linked to greater cognitive impairment, inflammation and insulin resistance.

6. Kidney and Urinary Health

High dietary phosphorus density is a risk factor for incident chronic kidney disease development in diabetic subjects: a community-based prospective cohort study.

Phosphorus is a dietary mineral found in protein-rich foods, such as dairy products, meat, poultry and fish, especially processed meat and cheese. Cereals are also a decent source.

This observational study in diabetic adults found that a high dietary phosphorus intake was associated with an increased risk of chronic kidney disease.

Vitamin C Depletion and All-Cause Mortality in Renal Transplant Recipients.

This observational study in 598 kidney transplant recipients found that low vitamin C levels (vitamin C depletion) were associated with a 95% higher risk of death.

The authors hypothesized that these benefits are partly caused by vitamin C’s anti-inflammatory effects.

Vitamin B-6 deficiency is common and associated with poor long-term outcome in renal transplant recipients.

This observational study in 687 kidney transplant recipients (KTRs) found that they were often deficient in vitamin B6. However, the deficiency didn’t appear to be caused by a poor intake of vitamin B6.

Additionally, the study showed that vitamin B6-deficient KTRs were 114% more likely to die, compared to those who had adequate levels.

7. Muscles and Physical Performance

High adherence to a Mediterranean diet and lower risk of frailty among French older adults community dwellers: Results from the Three-City-Bordeaux study.

This prospective observational study in 560 French adults aged 75 or older showed that following a diet resembling the Mediterranean diet (MD) was linked to a reduced risk of frailty.

Specifically, it was associated with a 55% reduced risk of slowness, 56% lower risk of poor muscle strength and a 61% decreased risk of low physical activity, compared to those who followed a diet that least resembled the MD.

8. Growth

Association between noncow milk beverage consumption and childhood height.

Previous studies indicate that a high cow milk intake may increase height growth in childhood.

This observational study in 5,034 Canadian children aged 24–72 months found that high non-cow milk consumption was associated with shorter childhood height.

9. Infections and Immune Health

Effects of continuous use of probiotics before liver transplantation: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

This controlled study in 55 patients waiting for a liver transplant (LT) examined the health benefits of probiotic supplements.

The study showed that those who took probiotic supplements before LT were significantly less likely to suffer from infections in the following 90 days after LT.

10. Longevity and Healthy Aging

Fried potato consumption is associated with elevated mortality: an 8-y longitudinal cohort study.

This eight-year observational study in 4,440 US adults aged 45–79 showed that eating fried potatoes 2–3 times per week was linked to a 95% higher risk of death, compared to those with the lowest intake of fried potatoes.

The risk appeared to be dose-dependent. Eating them three times or more per week was linked to a 126% higher risk. In contrast, eating unfried potatoes was not significantly associated with the risk of death.

11. Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients

Lactose Intolerance (LCT-13910C>T) Genotype Is Associated with Plasma 25-Hydroxyvitamin D Concentrations in Caucasians: A Mendelian Randomization Study.

Genetics affect people’s risk of developing lactose intolerance (LI). The LCT-13910C>T gene variant is involved.

This observational study showed that people with the CC type of LCT-13910C>T were at an increased risk of LI, compared to the TT genotype. Also, Caucasians with the CC genotype had lower levels of vitamin D, partly due to their lower dairy intake.
This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Barley beta-glucan may help you lose weight.
Replacing saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat (mostly omega-6) may not affect heart disease risk.
Low-quality, oxidized fish oil doesn’t have as many benefits as high-quality fish oil.
Prunes may reduce bone loss in postmenopausal women.
Synbiotic supplements may improve the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.

New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Brain and Mental Health
Bone Health
Muscles and Physical Performance
Arthritis
Inflammation
Longevity and Healthy Aging
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Flavonoid intake is inversely associated with obesity and C-reactive protein, a marker for inflammation, in US adults.

Flavonoids are a category of antioxidants found in virtually all plant-derived foods, especially fresh vegetables, fruits, legumes and whole grains.

This observational study in 9,551 US adults found that those who consumed a lot of flavonoids were less likely to be obese. Additionally, a high flavonoid intake was associated with lower levels of C-reactive protein, which is a marker of inflammation.

Effects of high beta-glucan barley on visceral fat obesity in Japanese subjects: a randomized double blind study.

Barley beta-glucan is a water-soluble, viscous fiber that’s similar to oat beta-glucan, which has been linked to various health benefits.

This controlled study in 100 Japanese adults showed that eating a diet high in barley beta-glucan, or 4.4 grams per day for three months, led to greater weight loss than barley that didn’t contain any beta-glucan.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Vitamin D supplementation has no effect on insulin sensitivity or secretion in vitamin D-deficient, overweight or obese adults: a randomized placebo-controlled trial.

This controlled study in 65 vitamin D-deficient, overweight or obese adults showed that a one-time 100,000-IU dose of cholecalciferol followed by a 4000-IU daily dose of cholecalciferol for four months did not affect insulin sensitivity or production.

3. Heart Health

Unprocessed Meat Consumption and Incident Cardiovascular Diseases in Korean Adults: The Korean Genome and Epidemiology Study (KoGES).

This observational study in 9,370 Korean adults showed that a moderate intake of unprocessed meat and regular consumption of poultry was linked to a reduced risk of heart disease.

High intake of unprocessed meat was not significantly associated with the risk of heart disease.

Low-fat dietary pattern and cardiovascular disease: results from the Womens Health Initiative randomized controlled trial.

This controlled study in 48,835 postmenopausal women aged 50–79 found that following a low-fat diet consisting of 20% of calories from fat for eight years did not affect the risk of heart disease overall, compared to a usual diet.

However, women without prior heart disease appeared to benefit from the diet, although the health improvements were offset by an increased risk of stroke.

The effect of replacing saturated fat with mostly n-6 polyunsaturated fat on coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.

This meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that replacing saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat (mostly omega-6) probably doesn’t reduce the risk of heart disease, death from heart disease or death from any cause.

Some previous meta-analyses have concluded that replacing saturated fat with omega-6 fat has benefits for heart health. However, the researchers pointed out that they may have included inadequately controlled studies.

High-quality fish oil has a more favourable effect than oxidised fish oil on intermediate-density lipoprotein and LDL subclasses: a randomised controlled trial.

Numerous studies show that taking fish oil supplements may reduce the risk of heart disease. However, not all fish oil is the same.

This controlled study in 54 adults showed that high-quality fish oil caused a greater reduction in the levels of LDL particles, total blood lipids and cholesterol than low-quality, oxidized fish oil.

Dietary polyphenol intake and risk of hypertension in the Polish arm of the HAPIEE study.

Polyphenols are a large and diverse group of antioxidants that is found in most plant-derived foods. A high intake of polyphenol-rich foods has been linked to a variety of health benefits.

This observational study in 2,725 Polish adults showed that a high intake of polyphenols was linked to a 31% lower risk of developing abnormally high blood pressure (hypertension).

4. Cancer

Protective Effect of Dietary Calcium Intake on Esophageal Cancer Risk: A Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies.

This meta-analysis of 17 observational studies showed that a high intake of calcium was associated with a 20% lower risk of cancer in the esophagus.

Calcium appeared to be most protective against esophageal squamous cell cancer in Asian populations.

Dietary Intake of Meat Cooking-Related Mutagens (HCAs) and Risk of Colorectal Adenoma and Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

This review and meta-analysis of observational studies concluded that contaminants that form when meat is cooked at a high temperature may be responsible for meat’s association with an increased risk of colon cancer.

5. Brain and Mental Health

Influence of Diet in Multiple Sclerosis: A Systematic Review.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative disease. It’s characterized by a variety of neurological symptoms, ranging from impaired memory and mental problems to impaired eyesight, muscle weakness and lack of coordination.

This review concluded that a high intake of vitamin D may reduce the risk of MS and improve symptoms. Additionally, a few studies show that low vitamin B12 levels are associated with worsened MS symptoms.

6. Bone Health

Bone-Protective Effects of Dried Plum in Postmenopausal Women: Efficacy and Possible Mechanisms.

Previous studies in rats and postmenopausal women suggest that eating dried plums (prunes) is an effective way to prevent bone loss (osteoporosis), potentially reducing the risk of fractures.

This follow-up study found that postmenopausal women who ate 100 grams of prunes every day for one year retained higher bone mineral density five years later, compared to the placebo group.

Vegetable and Fruit Intake and Fracture-Related Hospitalisations: A Prospective Study of Older Women.

This observational study in 1,468 older, postmenopausal women found that a high self-reported intake of vegetables was linked to a lower risk of bone fractures. In contrast, fruit intake was not associated with fracture risk.

When the researchers looked at different vegetable types, onions and cruciferous vegetables appeared to be the most protective. For instance, a high intake of cruciferous vegetables reduced fracture risk by 28%, compared to low intake.

7. Muscles and Physical Performance

A higher protein intake is associated with improved muscle strength in elite senior athletes.

This observational study in 50 older, elite athletes found that a higher protein intake was associated with greater muscle strength.

8. Arthritis

Synbiotic supplementation and the effects on clinical and metabolic responses in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Synbiotics are supplements containing both probiotics and prebiotics (beneficial bacteria and the fiber that nourishes them). Their anti-inflammatory effects might benefit people with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).

This two-month, controlled study in 54 adults with RA found that daily synbiotic supplements significantly improved insulin sensitivity, reduced levels of the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein (CRP) and alleviated the symptoms of RA.

Dietary and Supplemental Vitamin C and D on Symptom Severity and Physical Function in Knee Osteoarthritis.

Previous observational studies indicate that high levels of vitamins C and D may reduce pain and improve function in people with knee osteoarthritis (KO).

This observational study in people with KO found that vitamin D supplements were strongly linked to better function. However, high vitamin D levels were associated with greater pain, whereas vitamin C wasn’t linked to any measures of KO.

9. Inflammation

Cardamom supplementation improves inflammatory and oxidative stress biomarkers in hyperlipidemic, overweight, and obese pre-diabetic women: A randomized double-blind clinical trial.

Cardamom is a spice that’s commonly used in Indian cuisine.

This controlled study in 80 overweight or obese, pre-diabetic women found taking 3 grams of cardamom supplements per day for two months significantly reduced markers of inflammation (CRP and IL-6) and oxidative stress (malondialdehyde).

10. Longevity and Healthy Aging

Nonfermented milk and other dairy products: associations with all-cause mortality.

This observational study in 103,256 Swedish adults showed that eating a lot of non-fermented dairy (ND) and butter was linked to a 32% greater risk of death from any cause, compared to eating ND only once per week.

The risk of death was higher among those who consumed mostly medium or low-fat milk. In contrast, fermented milk products, such as yogurt and cheese, were associated with a lower risk of death.

This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Pro-inflammatory diets are associated with an increased risk of weight gain and obesity.
Inadequate water intake impairs blood sugar control.
A low-FODMAP diet may not benefit people with inflammatory bowel disease.
New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Brain and Mental Health
Digestive Health
Bone Health
Muscles and Physical Performance
Inflammation
Antioxidants and Oxidative Stress
Pain
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Inflammatory potential of diet, weight gain, and incidence of overweight/obesity: The SUN cohort.

The Dietary Inflammatory Index (DII) rates the inflammatory potential of a diet. Some foods are pro-inflammatory, whereas others are anti-inflammatory or neutral.

This observational study followed 7,027 university graduates for approximately eight years. It found that pro-inflammatory diets were associated with a higher yearly weight gain and an increased risk of overweight or obesity.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Dietary Patterns and Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Literature Review and Meta-Analysis of Prospective Studies.

This meta-analysis of observational studies concluded that diets high in refined grains, sugar-sweetened soft drinks, high-fat dairy, fried foods and/or processed meat were significantly associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D).

In contrast, dietary patterns characterized by vegetables, fruits, legumes, fish and poultry were linked with a reduced risk of T2D.

Eating glutinous brown rice twice a day for 8 weeks improves glycemic control in Japanese patients with diabetes mellitus.

This crossover study in 18 Japanese adults with type 2 diabetes found that eating glutinous brown rice twice a day for two months improved blood sugar control and reduced hemoglobin levels, compared to white rice.

Reduced water intake deteriorates glucose regulation in patients with type 2 diabetes.

Previous studies show that inadequate water intake is associated with poor blood sugar control.

This observational study in nine diabetic men confirmed previous findings. It found that drinking little water for three days impaired their ability to keep blood sugar levels in check after eating sugar.

3. Heart Health

Contribution of dietary amino acids composition to incidence of cardiovascular outcomes: A prospective population-based study.

This observational study followed 2,369 Iranian adults for about seven years. It found that protein intake had no significant effect on the risk of heart disease. However, the amino acid composition of dietary proteins may play a role.

Specifically, a high intake of glycine, cysteine, arginine, tryptophan and sulphur-containing amino acids was linked to a reduced risk of heart disease. In contrast, a high intake of glutamic acid and proline increased the risk of heart disease.

Red meat and chicken consumption and its association with high blood pressure and obesity in South Korean children and adolescents: a cross-sectional analysis of KSHES, 2011–2015.

This prospective observational study in 136,739 South Korean children and adolescents showed that a higher meat intake was associated with lower body mass index and blood pressure.

Greater Frequency of Fruit and Vegetable Consumption Is Associated With Lower Prevalence of Peripheral Artery Disease.

Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is when arteries (other than those that supply the heart or brain with blood) start to narrow. PAD may restrict blood supply to the legs, arms or other body parts.

This study in 3,696,778 US adults found that a high intake of fruits and vegetables was linked to a lower risk of PAD. Eating three or more servings daily was linked to an 18% lower risk of PAD, compared to eating fruits and vegetables less than monthly.

4. Cancer

Vitamin B6 Intake and the Risk of Colorectal Cancer: A Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies.

This meta-analysis of prospective observational studies including a total of 784,550 participants concluded that the intake of vitamin B6 is not significantly associated with the risk of colorectal cancer.

However, a dose-response analysis, which included a few eligible studies, showed that for each 5 mg increase in vitamin B6 intake, the risk of colorectal cancer decreased by 17%.

5. Brain and Mental Health

Dietary Protein Intake and Stroke Risk in a General Japanese Population.

This observational study followed 2,400 Japanese adults aged 40–79 for up to 19 years. It found that a high intake of protein was associated with a reduced risk of stroke.

Vegetable protein appeared to be especially protective. A high vegetable protein intake was linked to a 40% reduced risk of stroke, compared to those with the lowest intakes.

6. Digestive Health

Is a Low FODMAP Diet Beneficial for Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease? A Meta-analysis and Systematic Review.

FODMAPs are a category of carbs that are poorly absorbed. They may cause digestive discomfort in some people, especially those with irritable bowel syndrome or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).

This meta-analysis of controlled studies including a total of 319 patients concluded that there is no evidence that low-FODMAP diets benefit people with IBD.

7. Bone Health

Neonatal vitamin D status from archived dried blood spots and future risk of fractures in childhood: results from the D-tect study, a population-based case-cohort study.

This observational study in 1,039 Danish people showed that vitamin D status in newborn infants is not associated with the risk of fractures in childhood.

8. Muscles and Physical Performance

Even mealtime distribution of protein intake is associated with greater muscle strength, but not with 3-y physical function decline, in free-living older adults: the Quebec longitudinal study on Nutrition as a Determinant of Successful Aging (NuAge study).

Eating adequate amounts of protein with every meal may be important in the maintenance of muscle mass among older people.

This observational study in 1,741 older, Canadian adults found that eating sufficient protein with all meals is associated with greater muscle strength, compared to eating most of their daily protein in one meal.

Alternate Mediterranean diet score is positively associated with skeletal muscle mass index in middle-aged adults.

The Mediterranean diet is associated with various health benefits. It is characterized by a high intake of whole grains, vegetables, fruits, nuts and fish, as well as a lower intake of red meat.

This observational study in 3,289 Chinese adults aged 40–75 found that a diet that scored high on the Alternate Mediterranean diet score was associated with higher muscle mass, especially among men and younger participants.

Intake of B vitamins and impairment in physical function in older adults.

Mobility, or a person’s ability to move, is an important aspect of physical function. Impaired mobility is an serious problem for many older people.

This observational study followed 1,630 older Spanish people for around 3.5 years. It found that a higher intake of vitamin B6, as well as foods rich in vitamin B6, such as fish and fruits, was associated with a reduced risk of impaired mobility.

9. Inflammation

Probiotic yogurt and acidified milk similarly reduce postprandial inflammation and both alter the gut microbiota of healthy, young men.

This two-week crossover study in 14 healthy men compared the effects of eating 400 grams of probiotic yogurt (PY) or acidified milk (AM) every day on inflammatory markers. The study detected no significant differences between the two.

However, both PY and AM reduced the inflammatory response to a high-fat meal, compared to responses at the start of the study. They also appeared to cause beneficial changes in the gut microbiota.

Effects of supplementation with quercetin on plasma C-reactive protein concentrations: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Quercetin is one of the most common antioxidant flavonoids found in plant foods. It is also sold as a supplement. Previous studies suggest it may have anti-inflammatory effects.

This meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that quercetin may reduce the levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), a common inflammatory marker, especially when taken in doses exceeding 500 mg per day and among patients who are high in CRP.

10. Antioxidants and Oxidative Stress

The Impact of Probiotic Soy Milk Consumption on Oxidative Stress Among Type 2 Diabetic Kidney Disease Patients: A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial.

Oxidative stress (OS) is a condition characterized by low levels of antioxidants, relative to oxidants. It has been linked to various chronic diseases and inflammation.

This controlled study in 48 patients with diabetic kidney disease showed that eating 200 ml of probiotic soy milk every day for two months reduced several markers of oxidative stress, compared to normal soy milk.

11. Pain

The effects of a multispecies probiotic on migraine and markers of intestinal permeability–results of a randomized placebo-controlled study.

The cause of migraines is unknown. Scientists have hypothesized that increased intestinal permeability (IP), which may allow toxins to “leak” into the bloodstream, may be to blame.

This controlled study in 63 patients showed that taking multispecies probiotic supplements daily for three months did not reduce the risk or severity of migraines, compared to a placebo. Also, markers of IP or inflammation did not improve.
This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Prebiotic supplements may reduce body fat in children.
Hazelnuts may help improve the blood lipid profile in children and adolescents with abnormally high blood lipids.
Pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate is as effective as celecoxib, an inflammatory drug, at treating osteoarthritis.
Milk appears to improve the absorption of zinc from the diet.

New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Heart Health
Cancer
Appetite and Eating
Bone Health
Arthritis
Inflammation
Infections and Immune Health
Women’s Health
Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Prebiotic Reduces Body Fat and Alters Intestinal Microbiota in Children With Overweight or Obesity.

This controlled study in Canadian children aged 7–12 investigated the effects of taking 8 grams of a prebiotic supplement once daily for four months. The prebiotic consisted of oligofructose-enriched inulin (OEI).

The study found that OEI reduced body fat by 2.4% and trunk fat by 3.8%, compared to a maltodextrin placebo. OEI also significantly reduced the inflammatory marker IL-6 and decreased triglyceride levels.

2. Heart Health

Effect of diets rich in either saturated fat or n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids and supplemented with long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on plasma lipoprotein profiles.

In this controlled study, 26 people took 400 mg of EPA and 2,000 mg of DHA for six weeks. Half of the people followed a diet high in saturated fat, while the other half followed a diet high in omega-6 fatty acids, mainly linoleic acid.

Both groups experienced significant improvements in their blood lipid profiles. Specifically, the diets decreased the concentration of triglycerides and VLDL particles, as well as VLDL and LDL particle size.

Effect of hazelnut on serum lipid profile and fatty acid composition of erythrocyte phospholipids in children and adolescents with primary hyperlipidemia: a randomized controlled trial.

This two-month controlled study in 66 children and adolescents with abnormally elevated blood lipids (hyperlipidemia) investigated the effects of eating 15–30 grams of hazelnuts per day on the blood lipid profile.

Hazelnuts reduced the levels of LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) and increased the levels of HDL cholesterol relative to LDL-C, potentially reducing the risk of heart disease. They also improved the fatty acid composition in red blood cells.

The Effect of Dairy Consumption on Lipid Profile: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.

This meta-analysis of nine controlled studies including a total of 1,102,516 women concluded that a high dairy intake increased the levels of LDL cholesterol. In contrast, it had no effects on triglycerides or HDL cholesterol.

3. Cancer

B-Vitamin Intake from Diet and Supplements and Breast Cancer Risk in Middle-Aged Women: Results from the Prospective NutriNet-Santé Cohort.

This prospective observational study in 27,853 women aged 45 or older found that a high intake of vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) was associated with a 33% lower risk of breast cancer.

A higher Dietary Inflammatory Index score is associated with a higher risk of breast cancer among Chinese women: a case-control study.

The Dietary Inflammatory Index (DII) rates the inflammatory potential of a diet. Some foods are pro-inflammatory, whereas others are anti-inflammatory or neutral.

This observational study in 1,691 Chinese women found that higher DII scores were associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.

Nut Consumption and Lung Cancer Risk: Results from Two Large Observational Studies.

This analysis of two prospective, observational studies including a total of 20,631 American adults showed that a high intake of nuts was associated with a lower risk of lung cancer.

Specifically, those who consumed the most nuts were at a 14–26% lower risk of developing lung cancer, regardless of how much they smoked.

4. Appetite and Eating

Short-term effects of a low glycemic index carob containing snack on energy intake, satiety and glycemic response in normal-weight, healthy adults. Results from two randomized-trials.

Carob trees are grown for their edible pods, which are known as carob. Carob powder is sold in many health food shops and can be used similarly to cocoa powder.

This crossover study in 50 healthy adults found that eating a carob-based snack before a meal increased satiety, decreased calorie intake and reduced the rise in blood sugar after the meal, compared to eating a pre-meal chocolate cookie.

Sugar Restriction Leads to Increased Ad Libitum Sugar Intake by Overweight Adolescents in an Experimental Test Meal Setting.

This crossover study in 87 adolescents found that sugar restriction resulted in higher sugar intake when they were subsequently given access to high-sugar foods, compared to those who were not sugar restricted.

Also, those who were the most impulsive tended to eat more sugar than those who acted with more forethought.

5. Bone Health

Carotenoid dietary intakes and plasma concentrations are associated with heel bone ultrasound attenuation and osteoporotic fracture risk in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Norfolk cohort.

Carotenoids are a class of antioxidant pigments found mainly in fruits and vegetables. The best known carotenoid is beta-carotene, which can be converted into vitamin A in the body.

This study in middle-aged adults found that a high intake of lutein and zeaxanthin was linked to a lower risk of wrist fracture in women. Alpha and beta-carotene were associated with a lower risk of hip fracture in men.

6. Arthritis

Pharmaceutical-grade Chondroitin sulfate is as effective as celecoxib and superior to placebo in symptomatic knee osteoarthritis: the ChONdroitin versus CElecoxib versus Placebo Trial (CONCEPT).

This controlled study in 604 patients with knee osteoarthritis found that taking 800 mg of high-quality, pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate (CS) for half a year reduced pain and significantly improved function, compared to a placebo.

CS was as effective as taking 200 mg of celecoxib per day. Celecoxib is a common anti-inflammatory drug used to treat knee osteoarthritis. Low-quality CS supplements may not have the same benefits.

7. Inflammation

The Effect of Dietary Glycemic Properties on Markers of Inflammation, Insulin Resistance, and Body Composition in Postmenopausal American Women: An Ancillary Study from a Multicenter Protein Supplementation Trial.

This controlled study in 84 older, postmenopausal women found that taking a whey protein supplement every day for 18 months did not affect inflammatory markers or insulin sensitivity, compared to taking a maltodextrin supplement.

However, the protein supplement was linked to increased lean mass (muscle mass).

The influence of persistent organic pollutants in the traditional Inuit diet on markers of inflammation.

The levels of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are concentrated in many marine animals that are high in the food chain, such as whales and seals. As a result, the traditional Greenland Inuit diet is high in POPs.

This observational study in Greenland Inuits found that high levels of POPs in blood samples were associated with higher levels of inflammatory markers, which are linked to an increased risk of chronic disease.

8. Infections and Immune Health

Impact of Maternal Selenium Status on Infant Outcome during the First 6 Months of Life.

Infants and pregnant women are at an increased risk of selenium deficiency, which may adversely affect brain and immune health.

This observational study in 272 women found that low selenium levels during pregnancy were linked to an increased risk of infant infection during the first six weeks of life. Their dexterity and coordination were also lower.

Vitamin D Supplementation in the Critically Ill: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Up to 50% of critically ill patients are low in vitamin D. Previous studies have associated vitamin D insufficiency with an increased risk of death and longer stays in intensive care units and hospitals.

This meta-analysis of six controlled studies concluded that vitamin D supplements do not reduce the risk of infections or death. Also, they did not affect the length of hospitalization or the time spent in intensive care units.

Immune Components in Human Milk Are Associated with Early Infant Immunological Health Outcomes: A Prospective Three-Country Analysis.

This observational study in 398 pregnant or lactating women and their children analyzed the effects of immune active molecules in breastmilk on immune health in the first year of life.

The study indicates that certain compounds in milk may protect the child against the common cold and reduce the risk of eczema or food allergies.

Tea Drinking and Its Association with Active Tuberculosis Incidence among Middle-Aged and Elderly Adults: The Singapore Chinese Health Study.

Tuberculosis (TC) is an infectious bacterial disease that usually affects the lungs, causing a fever and chronic cough with bloody phlegm.

This observational study in 63,257 Chinese people aged 45–74 showed that drinking either black or green tea daily was linked to an 18% lower risk of TC. In contrast, coffee intake was not significantly associated with TC risk.

9. Women’s Health

Vitamin D and calcium intake and risk of early menopause.

Menopause is the period in a woman’s life when she stops menstruating. It usually happens in middle-age, but about 10% of women have an early menopause (EM) before the age of 45.

This observational study found that women with the highest intake of dietary vitamin D (around 528 IU/day) were at a 17% lower risk of an EM, compared to those who had the lowest vitamin D intake (148 IU/day). Supplements had no effects.

10. Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients

Upregulation of Zinc Absorption Matches Increases in Physiologic Requirements for Zinc in Women Consuming High- or Moderate-Phytate Diets during Late Pregnancy and Early Lactation.

Women’s dietary requirements for zinc increase when they are pregnant or lactating. This observational study in Guatemalan women found that the absorption of zinc from the gut increased during pregnancy and lactation.

The increase in absorption matched the increase in zinc requirements, regardless of the intake of dietary phytic acid, a compound that binds to zinc and reduces its absorption.

Zinc Absorption from Milk Is Affected by Dilution but Not by Thermal Processing, and Milk Enhances Absorption of Zinc from High-Phytate Rice in Young Dutch Women.

Previous studies suggest that milk may increase the absorption of zinc from other foods. Two crossover studies in healthy young women showed that drinking full-fat milk improved the absorption of zinc from rice by 62%, compared to water.

Ultra-high temperature treating (pasteurizing) milk did not change its beneficial effects on zinc absorption. However, diluting the milk with water reduced its effects.
This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Children who eat faster tend to eat more and gain weight.
Supplementing with genistein, a soy isoflavone, may improve insulin sensitivity.
Following a calorie-reduced diet for an extended period may reduce food cravings.
Eating probiotic yogurt may improve immune function, potentially reducing the risk of infection.
New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Appetite and Eating
Brain and Mental Health
Digestive Health
Bone Health
Muscles and Physical Performance
Arthritis
Inflammation
Infections and Immune Health
Longevity and Healthy Aging
Growth
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Faster eating rates are associated with higher energy intakes during an ad libitum meal, higher BMI and greater adiposity among 4·5-year-old children: results from the Growing Up in Singapore Towards Healthy Outcomes (GUSTO) cohort.

This observational study in Singaporean children showed that those who ate faster had a higher calorie intake and tended to have a higher body mass index and fat mass, compared to children who ate slower.

Specifically, children who ate faster had a 75% higher calorie intake than those who ate slowly.

Subcutaneous fat loss is greater than visceral fat loss with diet and exercise, weight-loss promoting drugs and bariatric surgery: a critical review and meta-analysis.

This meta-analysis concluded that all weight loss methods, including dietary modifications, exercise, supplements or bariatric surgery, cause a greater loss of skin fat than belly fat when measured by volume or weight.

However, the percent decrease in belly fat is always greater than the percent decrease in skin fat.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Genistein supplementation improves insulin resistance and inflammatory state in non-alcoholic fatty liver patients: a randomized, controlled trial.

Genistein is an antioxidant isoflavone found in high amounts in soybeans and soy products.

This controlled study in 82 adults with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) showed that taking 250 mg of genistein supplements daily for 2 months reduced insulin resistance and markers of oxidative stress and inflammation.

3. Heart Health

Alcohol consumption and risk of heart failure: meta-analysis of 13 prospective studies.

Heart failure occurs when the heart is not able to pump enough blood throughout the body to meet the body’s needs. Previous studies have provided inconsistent results on the association between alcohol intake and heart failure.

This analysis of 13 observational studies found that light alcohol intake was linked to a 14% lower risk of heart failure, whereas higher intake was not associated with it.

Association of dietary nitrate with atherosclerotic vascular disease mortality: a prospective cohort study of older adult women.

Atherosclerosis (AS) is a disease of the arteries, which are the blood vessels that carry blood from the heart. Previous studies show that nitrate-rich vegetables improve the health of blood vessels, including the arteries, but it is unknown if they affect AS.

This prospective observational study in 1,226 older Australian women showed that a high intake of nitrate-rich vegetables was associated with a lower risk of death from atherosclerosis.

4. Cancer

Inflammatory diet and risk of colorectal cancer: A population based Case-Control Study in Newfoundland, Canada.

The Dietary Inflammatory Index (DII) rates the inflammatory potential of a diet. Some foods may be pro-inflammatory, whereas others may be anti-inflammatory or neutral.

This observational study in Canadian adults found that following a pro-inflammatory diet, which ranked high on the DII, was linked to an increased risk of colorectal cancer.

5. Appetite and Eating

Extended calorie restriction suppresses overall and specific food cravings: a systematic review and a meta-analysis.

This review and meta-analysis concluded that following a calorie-reduced diet for an extended period reduces food cravings.

6. Brain and Mental Health

Citrus consumption and incident dementia in elderly Japanese: the Ohsaki Cohort 2006 Study.

This observational study in 13,373 older Japanese people showed that those who ate citrus fruits 3–4 times per week were 8% less likely to develop dementia than those who ate citrus fruits two or less times per week.

Effect of maternal antenatal and newborn supplementation with vitamin A on cognitive development of school-aged children in rural Bangladesh: a follow-up of a placebo-controlled, randomized trial.

This controlled study in Bangladeshi mothers and their children showed that taking vitamin A supplements during pregnancy and around birth had no significant effects on the children’s intelligence or memory at the age of eight.

However, children who were exposed to vitamin A supplements as newborns and while still in the womb were significantly better at reading, spelling and math, compared to the placebo.

7. Digestive Health

Association between coffee or tea drinking and Barrett’s esophagus or esophagitis: an Italian study.

Barret’s esophagus (BE) is a complication of chronic acid reflux. It is characterized by changes in the cells that line the lowest part of the esophagus, which is the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach.

This observational study suggests that drinking coffee or tea reduces the risk of BE and inflammation in the esophagus.

8. Bone Health

Milk-cereal and whole-grain dietary patterns protect against low bone mineral density among male adolescents and young adults.

This observational study in 1,351 Korean men aged 10–25 showed that a high intake of milk, cereals and whole grains was associated with a higher bone mineral density, possibly reducing their future risk of developing osteoporosis.

9. Muscles and Physical Performance

Diet with a combination of high protein and high total antioxidant capacity is strongly associated with low prevalence of frailty among old Japanese women: a multicenter cross-sectional study.

This observational study in 2,108 Japanese women aged 65 and older showed that a high intake of protein and/or antioxidants was associated with a lower risk of frailty.

A combination of both seemed to provide the greatest protection against frailty.

10. Arthritis

Dietary intake of fibre and risk of knee osteoarthritis in two US prospective cohorts.

Osteoarthritis is a degenerative joint disease characterized by the breakdown of cartilage in joints. The main symptoms are joint swelling, stiffness and pain.

This observational study in US adults showed that a higher fiber intake was associated with a lower risk of osteoarthritis.

11. Inflammation

The association of dietary vitamin C intake with periodontitis among Korean adults: Results from KNHANES Ⅳ.

Periodontitis, or gum disease, is characterized by inflammation in the tissues that surround the teeth. It is caused by a strong immune reaction to the bacteria that live on the teeth.

This observational study in 10,930 Korean adults found that inadequate vitamin C intake was linked to a higher risk of periodontitis.

The long-term relationship between dietary pantothenic acid (vitamin B5) intake and C-reactive protein concentration in adults aged 40 years and older.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is an inflammatory marker. Its levels increase in response to inflammation in the body.

This observational study in 908 South Korean adults aged 40 or older found that a high intake of pantothenic acid (vitamin B5) was associated with lower levels of CRP.

The impact of cholecalciferol supplementation on the systemic inflammatory profile: a systematic review and meta-analysis of high-quality randomized controlled trials.

Cholecalciferol, also known as vitamin D3, is a form of vitamin D found in animal fat.

This meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that cholecalciferol supplements do not appear to affect the levels of the inflammatory markers C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin 6 (IL-6).

12. Infections and Immune Health

Consumption of Dairy Yogurt Containing Lactobacillus paracasei ssp. paracasei, Bifidobacterium animalis ssp. lactis and Heat-Treated Lactobacillus plantarum Improves Immune Function Including Natural Killer Cell Activity.

This study in 200 adults examined the effects of eating probiotic yogurt every day for three months on immune function. The yogurt contained three probiotics: Lactobacillus paracasei, heat-treated L. plantarum and Bifidobacterium animalis.

The study showed that the probiotic yogurt significantly improved immune function, including natural killer cell activity, compared to those who consumed plain milk.

13. Longevity and Healthy Aging

Higher adherence to the ‘vegetable-rich’ dietary pattern is related to longer telomere length in women.

Telomeres are sequences of DNA at the ends of DNA strands that protect them from fusing with neighboring strands. They naturally shorten with age, but oxidative stress may accelerate their shortening, possibly contributing to aging.

This observational study in 553 Chinese adults found that a high intake of dairy products, eggs, tea, nuts, whole grains, fruits and vegetables was associated with longer telomeres in women, but not men.

Caffeine consumption and telomere length in men and women of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).

This observational study in 5,826 US adults found that a high caffeine intake was linked to reduced telomere length. Specifically, for every 100 mg of caffeine consumed per day, telomeres were 35.4 base pairs shorter.

However, a high intake of coffee, which is rich in caffeine, was associated with longer telomeres.

14. Growth

Vitamin D supplementation and growth in urban Mongol school children: Results from two randomized clinical trials.

This controlled study in vitamin D-deficient school children from Mongolia showed that taking 800 IU of vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) supplements daily for six months improved their growth.

In contrast, a second study found that drinking milk enriched with 300 IU of vitamin D every day for seven weeks did not significantly affect growth.

This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Olive oil may reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes and benefit those who are already diabetic.
Walnut oil improves the blood lipid profile, potentially reducing the risk of heart disease.
Galacto-oligosaccharide supplements, a type of prebiotic fiber, may increase the abundance of beneficial bifidobacteria in the gut by 400%.
Oxygenated water might improve recovery after exercise.
New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Digestive Health
Lung Health
Bone Health
Muscles and Physical Performance
Longevity and Healthy Aging
Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Protein intake and dietary glycemic load of 4-year-olds and association with adiposity and serum insulin at 7 years of age: sex-nutrient and nutrient–nutrient interactions.

This observational study in 1,999 children found that a high protein intake at age four was associated with a higher body mass index (BMI) at age seven.

The study also showed that a high protein intake was linked to higher fasting insulin levels in boys. Additionally, high dietary glycemic load was associated with an increased risk of fat gain in boys only.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Chocolate intake and diabetes risk in postmenopausal American women.

This observational study in 92,678 postmenopausal American women found no significant association between long-term chocolate intake and the risk of type 2 diabetes.

However, a moderate intake of chocolate reduced the risk in two subgroups of women — those who were younger than 65 and those whose physical activity was below median.

Olive oil in the prevention and management of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies and intervention trials.

This meta-analysis and review of observational and controlled studies concluded that a high intake of olive oil may reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes by 16%. It may also improve blood sugar control in people who are already diabetic.

3. Heart Health

A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of the effect of konjac glucomannan, a viscous soluble fiber, on LDL cholesterol and the new lipid targets non-HDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein B.

Glucomannan is a soluble dietary fiber produced from konjac root.

This meta-analysis of 12 controlled studies concluded that glucomannan supplements reduce LDL and non-HDL cholesterol levels, possibly reducing the risk of heart disease.

Circulating cadmium concentration and risk of aortic aneurysms: A nested case-control study within the Malmö Diet and Cancer cohort.

Aortic aneurysm (AA) is when the aorta, the body’s main artery, dilates or enlarges 1.5 times its normal size. It normally does not cause any symptoms, but it increases the risk of aortic rupture, which causes massive internal bleeding.

This observational study in 30,447 middle-aged, Swedish adults showed that high circulating cadmium levels were associated with a 250% increased risk of AA in current or ex-smokers.

Can sesame consumption improve blood pressure? A systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled trials.

This meta-analysis of eight controlled studies including 843 participants concluded that eating sesame seeds can reduce blood pressure. However, the evidence was considered weak and better designed studies need to confirm the effect.

The effect of a low salt diet on blood pressure and some hormones and lipids in people with normal and elevated blood pressure.

This Cochrane review and meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that reducing high sodium intake down to 3.8 grams of salt per day (66 mmol/day) decreased blood pressure in white people with high blood pressure (hypertension).

Specifically, it decreased systolic blood pressure by 5.5 mm and diastolic blood pressure by 2.9 mm, on average. Some studies suggest that sodium reduction may be even more effective in Asian and black people.

Effects of walnut oil on lipid profiles in hyperlipidemic type 2 diabetic patients: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

This was a controlled study in 100 diabetic people aged 35–75 who had elevated blood lipid levels (hyperlipidemia).

The study showed that taking 0.45 ounces (15 milliliters) of walnut oil for three months improved the blood lipid profile by reducing levels of triglycerides, LDL cholesterol and the total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol ratio.

4. Cancer

Association between phytosterol intake and colorectal cancer risk: a case-control study.

Phytosterols are plant compounds that resemble cholesterol in structure. They are found in high amounts in vegetable oils.

This observational study in 3,615 Chinese adults found that a high total phytosterol intake was associated with a 50% lower risk of colorectal cancer. However, one type of phytosterol called stigmasterol was linked to an increased risk in women.

5. Digestive Health

Oral Supplementation with Bovine Colostrum Decreases Intestinal Permeability and Stool Concentrations of Zonulin in Athletes.

Intestinal permeability describes the ability of the gut wall to control what compounds can slip through and into the blood. Vigorous exercise may increase IP. Abnormally high IP has been associated with various chronic diseases.

This was a controlled study in 16 training athletes, most of whom had high IP. It found that supplementing with 500 mg of cow colostrum for 20 days reduced intestinal permeability.

Supplementation of Diet with Galacto-oligosaccharides Increases Bifidobacteria, but not Insulin Sensitivity, in Obese Prediabetic Individuals.

Galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) are a category of prebiotic fiber that may improve the growth of beneficial gut bacteria, such as bifidobacteria.

This controlled study in 44 overweight or obese, prediabetic adults aged 45–70 showed that taking 15 grams of GOS per day for three months caused a five-fold increase in the abundance of bifidobacteria in the gut.

6. Lung Health

Longitudinal study of diet quality and change in asthma symptoms in adults, according to smoking status.

Asthma is a lung condition characterized by narrowing of the passages in the lungs, which may cause difficulties breathing. Asthma attacks can be triggered by physical exertion or particles in the air.

This observational study showed that a better dietary quality, estimated using the Alternative Healthy Eating Index 2010, was associated with a lower risk of asthma in people who had never smoked.

Association between lutein intake and lung function in adults: the Rotterdam Study.

Lutein is an antioxidant found in high amounts in many vegetables, such as kale, spinach, turnip greens, watercress, romaine lettuce, zucchini and Brussels sprouts.

This observational study in 4,402 adults aged 45–79 found no significant links between lutein intake and lung function. However, there were some indications of improved lung function in smokers.

7. Bone Health

Cadmium exposure and osteoporosis: a population-based study and benchmark dose estimation in southern China.

Cadmium (Cd) is a toxic heavy metal. Sources of cadmium include tobacco smoke, airborne dust and some grains and vegetables.

This observational study in 1,116 Chinese adults found that high urinary Cd levels were associated with lower bone mineral density, increasing the risk of osteoporosis.

Dietary protein and bone health: a systematic review and meta-analysis from the National Osteoporosis Foundation.

This meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that a high protein intake doesn’t impair bone mineral density (BMD). In fact, high protein intake may improve BMD in most bones.

8. Muscles and Physical Performance

Ingestion of oxygenated water enhances lactate clearance kinetics in trained runners.

Oxygenated water is a type of bottled water with high levels of dissolved oxygen. Some people consume OA to improve their exercise and sports performance, but evidence of its effectiveness is lacking.

This crossover study in trained male runners found that OA didn’t improve exercise performance. However, it seemed to improve recovery after exercise by increasing the clearance of lactate.

9. Longevity and Healthy Aging

Hb level, iron intake and mortality in Chinese adults: a 10-year follow-up study.

This observational study followed 8,291 Chinese adults for 10 years. It showed that both low and high iron intake was associated with an increased risk of death from any cause in women, but not in men.

10. Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients

Effects of the flavonol quercetin and α-linolenic acid on n-3 PUFA status in metabolically healthy men and women: a randomised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, crossover trial.

Your body may convert alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) into long-chain omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA), which have been linked with several health benefits. However, this conversion is not efficient.

This crossover study 74 healthy adults showed that taking ALA for eight weeks increased ALA levels by 56–69% and EPA levels by 26–37%, but it didn’t raise DHA levels. Taking 190 mg of quercetin per day with ALA had no effects.
This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Zinc supplements may improve wound healing in people with diabetic ulcers.
Obese children and adolescents are more likely to be depressed than their normal-weight counterparts.
Iron deficiency anemia is associated with a greater risk of deafness.
Chlorogenic acid may help people fall asleep.

New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Brain and Mental Health
Hearing
Digestive Health
Muscles and Physical Performance
Skin Health
Sleep
Contaminants and Food Safety
Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

The Association between Breakfast Skipping and Body Weight, Nutrient Intake, and Metabolic Measures among Participants with Metabolic Syndrome.

This observational study in 240 adults with metabolic syndrome showed that skipping breakfast was not associated with body weight, dietary quality or metabolic factors.

Plasma fatty acid patterns during pregnancy and child’s growth, body composition, and cardiometabolic health: the Generation R Study.

This observational study in 4,830 mothers and their children found that a higher intake of omega-3 fatty acids during pregnancy (estimated by measuring their levels in cells) was associated with lower fat mass in their children six years later.

Effects of coconut oil consumption on energy metabolism, cardiometabolic risk markers, and appetitive responses in women with excess body fat.

This crossover study in 15 overweight, adult women showed that eating 25 mL of virgin coconut oil (VCO) as part of a mixed breakfast did not affect the amount of calories burned, compared to extra virgin olive oil (EVOO).

Additionally, VCO didn’t cause any adverse changes in blood lipids or insulin sensitivity, compared to EVOO. However, VCO did not suppress hunger and fullness as much as EVOO.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

The effects of zinc supplementation on wound healing and metabolic status in patients with diabetic foot ulcer: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

This controlled study in 60 patients with diabetic foot ulcers showed that taking 220 mg of zinc sulfate supplements daily for three months significantly reduced ulcer size, compared to a placebo.

In addition, zinc supplements significantly improved blood sugar, insulin, insulin sensitivity, antioxidant status and HDL cholesterol levels.

Associations of Dietary Glucose, Fructose, and Sucrose with β-Cell Function, Insulin Sensitivity, and Type 2 Diabetes in the Maastricht Study.

This observational study in 2,818 middle-aged people showed that a higher intake of glucose was linked to higher insulin sensitivity. In contrast, fructose and sucrose were not significantly associated with insulin sensitivity.

Intake of different dietary proteins and risk of type 2 diabetes in men: the Kuopio Ischaemic Heart Disease Risk Factor Study.

This observational study in 2,332 Finnish men aged 42–60 found that plant and egg proteins were linked to a lower risk of type 2 diabetes, whereas other protein sources were not.

The study also estimated that replacing 1% of calories from animal protein with calories from plant protein was associated with an 18% reduced risk of type 2 diabetes.

3. Heart Health

Glycemic index, glycemic load, and blood pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

The glycemic index (GI) is a relative measure of the extent to which foods raise blood sugar levels.

This review and meta-analysis of 14 controlled studies including a total of 1,097 participants concluded that a lower-glycemic diet may reduce blood pressure, potentially reducing the risk of heart disease.

4. Cancer

High-quality Diets Associate With Reduced Risk of Colorectal Cancer: Analyses of Diet Quality Indexes in the Multiethnic Cohort.

This observational study in 190,949 Americans with various ethnic backgrounds showed that a higher dietary quality was associated with a significantly lower risk of colorectal cancer.

5. Brain and Mental Health

Exploring the association between childhood and adolescent obesity and depression: a meta-analysis.

This meta-analysis of 18 observational studies including a total of 51,272 participants concluded that obese children and adolescents are more likely to be depressed, or vice versa, than normal-weight children or adolescents.

Specifically, obesity was associated with a 34% greater risk of depression. In contrast, overweight was not significantly linked to depression.

6. Hearing

Association of Iron Deficiency Anemia With Hearing Loss in US Adults.

This observational study in 305,339 US adults found that iron deficiency anemia was associated with a greater risk of hearing loss.

7. Digestive Health

Adding arginine to prevent necrotising enterocolitis in preterm infants.

Necrotising enterocolitis (NE) is an inflammatory digestive disease that’s common among preterm infants. The risk of death is quite high.

This Cochrane review and meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that adding arginine supplements to a preterm infant’s diet may reduce the risk of NE.

Associations between Folate and Vitamin B12 Levels and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Meta-Analysis.

Inflammatory bowel disease, including Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), is characterized by inflammation in the digestive tract. Symptoms include stomach pain, diarrhea and weight loss.

This meta-analysis of observational studies showed that folate levels were significantly lower in people with UC, compared to those who were healthy. However, similar associations were not found in people with CD.

Safety of Adding Oats to a Gluten-free Diet for Patients with Celiac Disease: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Clinical and Observational Studies.

Oats are generally considered safe for people with celiac disease (CD). However, oatmeal may be contaminated with wheat in the factory, and some patients with CD may be sensitive to avenin, a protein found in oats.

However, this review and meta-analysis of controlled and observational studies concluded adding oats to a gluten-free diet has no adverse effects in people with CD.

8. Muscles and Physical Performance

Vitamin D Status, Muscle Strength and Physical Performance Decline in Very Old Adults: A Prospective Study.

This prospective observational study in very old adults found that low vitamin D levels were associated with a greater decline in muscle strength over the following five years. The association was stronger in men than women.

Higher dietary acid load is associated with a higher prevalence of frailty, particularly slowness/weakness and low physical activity, in elderly Japanese women.

Acid-producing diets have been linked to an increased risk of disease.

This observational study in 2,176 Japanese women aged 65–94 found that a higher dietary acid load was associated with greater frailty, especially slowness and weakness, as well as low physical activity.

9. Skin Health

Alcohol intake and risk of rosacea in US women.

Rosacea is an inflammatory skin condition that causes redness and swelling of the face.

This observational study in 82,737 US women showed that a high alcohol intake was associated with an increased risk of rosacea.

10. Sleep

Effects of subacute ingestion of chlorogenic acids on sleep architecture and energy metabolism through activity of the autonomic nervous system: a randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blinded cross-over trial.

Chlorogenic acid (CA) is the most abundant polyphenol antioxidant in coffee.

This controlled study in nine healthy adults found that taking 600 mg of CA supplements daily for five days increased fat burning and reduced the time it took them to fall asleep at night. However, it didn’t affect sleep in other ways.

11. Contaminants and Food Safety

Formation of oxysterols during thermal processing and frozen storage of cooked minced meat.

Cholesterol in food is susceptible to oxidation during storage and cooking, forming oxysterols. Previous studies indicate that oxysterols may promote inflammation and oxidative stress.

This study showed that greater amounts of oxysterols formed in meat cooked at 482°F (250 °C) than 356°F (180 °C). It also found that freezing meat or the addition of marjoram doesn’t completely prevent their formation during storage or cooking.

12. Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients

Mothers’ Consumption of Soy Drink But Not Black Tea Increases the Flavonoid Content of Term Breast Milk: A Pilot Randomized, Controlled Intervention Study.

Soy products are rich in antioxidants known as isoflavones. This controlled study in breastfeeding women showed that drinking 250 mL of a soy drink every day for six days significantly increased the levels of isoflavones in breast milk.

In contrast, drinking 300 mL of decaffeinated black tea didn’t significantly affect the antioxidant content of breast milk.
This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

While moderate coffee consumption may benefit heart health, too much may be detrimental.
A high magnesium intake is associated with a lower risk of hypertension.
Drinking purple grape juice may temporarily improve attention and mood.
New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Metabolic Syndrome
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Appetite and Eating
Brain and Mental Health
Eyes and Vision
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Polyphenol Levels Are Inversely Correlated with Body Weight and Obesity in an Elderly Population after 5 Years of Follow Up (The Randomised PREDIMED Study).

Polyphenols are a large group of antioxidants found in most plant-derived foods. A high intake of polyphenol-rich foods has been linked to a variety of health benefits.

This observational study in 573 older adults at a high risk of heart disease found that a high intake of polyphenols was associated with lower body weight, body mass index and waist circumference.

2. Metabolic Syndrome

Very-long-chain ω-3 fatty acid supplements and adipose tissue functions: a randomized controlled trial.

Long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, especially docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), may benefit patients with metabolic syndrome, possibly through their effects on fat tissue function.

This controlled study in 21 insulin resistant adults showed that taking supplements containing 3.9 g of DHA and EPA for half a year had no beneficial effects on fat breakdown or inflammation in fat cells.

3. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Soyfood and isoflavone intake and risk of type 2 diabetes in Vietnamese adults.

This observational study in 1,198 Vietnamese adults found that a high intake of soy foods was linked to a lower risk of type 2 diabetes. Those with the highest intake were 69% less likely to be diabetic.

4. Heart Health

Effect of nut consumption on vascular endothelial function: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

The inner lining of the blood vessels is called endothelium. When the endothelium is dysfunctional, the blood vessels are either too narrow or too dilated. Narrow blood vessels increase blood pressure and the risk of heart disease.

This meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that eating nuts improved endothelial function (ED). However, when different nut types were studied separately, only walnuts benefited ED.

Chocolate Consumption and Risk of Heart Failure: A Meta-Analysis of Prospective Studies.

This meta-analysis of observational studies including a total of 106,109 participants concluded that moderate chocolate consumption may reduce the risk of heart failure.

A Mediterranean diet lowers blood pressure and improves endothelial function: results from the MedLey randomized intervention trial.

Numerous studies have linked the Mediterranean diet (MD) to a reduced risk of chronic disease. The MD is a dietary pattern high in vegetables, fruits, whole grains, olive oil, seafood and fish.

This controlled study in 166 older adults showed that following the MD for half a year reduced systolic blood pressure and endothelial function. Although the change was small, it was statistically significant.

J-shaped relationship between habitual coffee consumption and 10-year (2002–2012) cardiovascular disease incidence: the ATTICA study.

This prospective observational study in 2,583 healthy adults found that low to moderate consumption of coffee was associated with a reduced risk of heart disease.

Drinking less than 150 ml daily was linked to a 56% reduced risk of heart disease, while drinking 150–250 ml per day was associated with a 51% lower risk. However, more than 250 ml per day was linked to a 148% higher risk of heart disease.

Dose-response relationship between dietary magnesium intake, serum magnesium concentration and risk of hypertension: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies.

This meta-analysis of 10 observational studies including a total of 180,566 participants concluded that a high intake of magnesium reduces the risk of abnormally high blood pressure (hypertension).

Those with the highest magnesium intake were at an 8% reduced risk of hypertension, compared to those with the lowest intake. Each 100 mg-dose of magnesium per day was estimated to lower the risk by 5%.

5. Cancer

Processed Meat and Colorectal Cancer Risk: A Pooled Analysis of Three Italian Case-Control Studies.

This observational study in Italian adults found that a high intake of processed meat (PM) was associated with an increased risk of cancer in the first section of the colon. However, PM intake was not linked to colon cancer overall.

Specifically, those who consumed the most PM, or more than 22–25 grams per day, were at a 38% increased risk.

Meat intake and risk of colorectal polyps: results from a large population-based screening study in Germany.

This observational study in 15,950 German adults aged 55 and older found no significant links between meat intake and colon cancer. However, the study detected a significant association between meat intake and cancer in the rectum.

Dietary patterns and colorectal cancer risk in middle-aged adults: a large population-based prospective cohort study.

This observational study followed 93,062 middle-aged, Japanese adults for 14–17 years. It found that a healthier, “prudent” dietary pattern was associated with a lower risk of colorectal cancer, compared to a Westernized dietary pattern.

The study found no significant associations between the traditional Japanese diet and the risk of colorectal cancer.

6. Appetite and Eating

Effects of whole grain rye, with and without resistant starch type 2 supplementation, on glucose tolerance, gut hormones, inflammation and appetite regulation in an 11–14.5 hour perspective; a randomized controlled study in healthy subjects.

This crossover study in 21 healthy people showed that eating a meal of whole-grain rye bread increased satiety and reduced the desire to eat, compared to white flour bread.

Additionally, whole-grain rye bread with added rye kernels and resistant starch decreased the rise in blood sugar and insulin after the meal. However, it had no effects on inflammatory markers or later calorie intake.

7. Brain and Mental Health

Cognitive and mood improvements following acute supplementation with purple grape juice in healthy young adults.

This controlled study in 20 healthy young adults showed that drinking 7.8 ounces (230 ml) of purple grape juice temporarily increased measures of attention and calmness, compared to a placebo.

Association between maternal intake of n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratio during pregnancy and infant neurodevelopment at 6 months of age: results of the MOCEH cohort study.

A high ratio of omega-6 to omega-3, which is typical of the Western diet, has been associated with adverse health effects.

This observational study showed that when mothers have a high ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids in their diet, their children’s neuro and cognitive development tends to be poorer at six months of age, compared to those with a low ratio.

Associations of lower vitamin D concentrations with cognitive decline and long-term risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in older adults.

This observational study followed 916 older French adults for 12 years. It found that a low vitamin D status may contribute to mental decline, as well as that adequate vitamin D intake may slow or delay dementia, especially Alzheimer’s disease.

Vitamin D deficiency was linked to a three-fold increase in the risk of Alzheimer’s disease.

Fish consumption, intake of fats and cognitive decline at middle and older age: the Doetinchem Cohort Study.

This five-year prospective observational study in 2,612 adults aged 43–70 found no consistent links between fatty fish intake and mental function.

However, it showed that a higher cholesterol intake was associated with a faster cognitive decline, as well as that a higher intake of omega-3 fatty acids, especially alpha-linolenic acid, was linked to a slower decline in cognitive function and memory.

8. Eyes and Vision

The Effect of a Mediterranean Diet on the Incidence of Cataract Surgery.

Cataracts are one of the most common eye diseases worldwide. Eye surgery is the only available treatment.

This controlled study in 5,802 adults aged 55–80 showed that following the Mediterranean diet, either enriched with nuts or extra-virgin olive oil, had no significant effects on the risk of developing a cataract, compared to a placebo.

Dietary intake of α-linolenic acid and risk of age-related macular degeneration.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is an eye disease that is a major cause of vision loss and blindness among Americans. The risk of AMD increases with age.

This observational study in 38,961 American women found that a high intake of α-linolenic acid (ALA) was associated with AMD before 2002, when trans-ALA was found in food. ALA intake was not significantly linked to AMD after 2002.
This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Probiotic supplements containing Lactobacillus rhamnosus may reduce the risk of diabetes during pregnancy.
High choline intake is associated with greater bone mineral density, potentially reducing the risk of osteoporosis.
Human milk oligosaccharides have protective effects on the digestive system in infants, especially preterm infants.
Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Appetite and Eating
Digestive Health
Liver Health
Bone Health
Longevity and Healthy Aging

1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Fruit Juice and Change in BMI: A Meta-analysis.

This meta-analysis of observational studies concluded that regularly drinking 100% fruit juice without added sugar is associated with a slightly increased risk of weight gain in children aged 1–6.

However, the authors considered the weight gain clinically insignificant. Also, no statistically significant association was found between 100% fruit juice intake and weight gain in children and adolescents aged 7–18.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Higher Maternal Dietary Protein Intake Is Associated with a Higher Risk of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus in a Multiethnic Asian Cohort.

This observational study in 980 Asian women found that a higher intake of both animal and vegetable protein was associated with an increased risk of diabetes during pregnancy.

Association of maternal serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations in second and third trimester with risk of gestational diabetes and other pregnancy outcomes.

This observational study in 4,718 women showed that high circulating levels of vitamin D were associated with an increased risk of diabetes during pregnancy.

Women low in vitamin D were also at an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as stillbirth, miscarriage and anemia.

Early pregnancy probiotic supplementation with Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 may reduce the prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus: a randomised controlled trial.

This controlled study in pregnant women found that supplementing with the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus early in pregnancy may reduce the risk of diabetes during pregnancy by 69%.

However, this was only statistically significant in women aged 35 or older or those who had previously suffered from diabetes during pregnancy.

3. Heart Health

Effects of Two Different Dietary Patterns on Inflammatory Markers, Advanced Glycation End Products and Lipids in Subjects without Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomised Crossover Study.

This crossover study in 51 adults compared the effects of two, four-week diets: 1) a diet high in red, processed meat and refined grains (HMD), and 2) a diet high in dairy, whole grains, nuts and legumes (HWD).

The study showed that levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), which is a risk factor for heart disease and blood clots, were higher after the HMD. No significant differences in inflammatory markers or blood lipids were detected.

Dietary inflammatory index and risk of first myocardial infarction; a prospective population-based study.

The Dietary Inflammatory Index (DII) rates the inflammatory potential of a diet. Some foods may be pro-inflammatory, whereas others may be anti-inflammatory.

This observational study in 6,944 Swedish adults showed that a pro-inflammatory diet increased the risk of having a first heart attack in males, whereas no significant links were found in women.

4. Cancer

Supplemental Selenium May Decrease Ovarian Cancer Risk in African-American Women.

This observational study in 1,038 African-American women showed that those who supplemented with the highest amounts of selenium were at a 30% lower risk of ovarian cancer, compared to those who didn’t supplement.

However, there was no significant association between the intake of selenium from food and ovarian cancer.

Prediagnostic enterolactone concentrations and mortality among Danish men diagnosed with prostate cancer.

Enterolactone is a lignan produced by intestinal bacteria from other dietary lignans. Lignans are antioxidant polyphenols that are abundant in some high-fiber foods, such as whole grains, fruits and vegetables.

This observational study in 1,390 Danish men who were diagnosed with prostate cancer found no significant association between circulating enterolactone levels (measured before diagnosis) and the risk of death during follow-up.

Fruit and vegetable intake and breast cancer prognosis: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies.

This meta-analysis of observational studies, including a total of 41,185 women, found no significant links between the intake of fruits and vegetables and the risk of breast cancer.

5. Appetite and Eating

Hunger and satiety responses to high-fat meals after a high polyunsaturated fat diet: A Randomized Trial.

Previous single-meal studies indicate that polyunsaturated fats (PUFAs) cause a greater satiety than other types of fat. However, the long-term effects of high-PUFA diets have not been examined.

This seven-day study in 26 adults showed that a high-PUFA diet increased fasting and post-meal levels of peptide YY (PYY), which is a marker of satiety, compared to the control diet. However, the participants didn’t report any changes in their appetite.

Color of hot soup modulates postprandial satiety, thermal sensation, and body temperature in young women.

This study in 12 young women found that eating a blue potato soup significantly reduced willingness to eat and ratings of palatability, comfort, warmth and anxiety, compared to soups that were white or yellow but otherwise identical.

Additionally, self-reported satiety was lower after eating the blue soup.

6. Digestive Health

Human milk oligosaccharide composition predicts risk of necrotising enterocolitis in preterm infants.

Necrotising enterocolitis (NE) is one of the most common intestinal disorders in preterm infants. The risk of death among infants with NE is quite high. Breastfed infants are at a significantly lower risk of NE than those who are formula fed.

This observational study in 200 mothers and their infants showed that the levels of disialyllacto-N-tetraose, a type of human milk oligosaccharide, were significantly lower in the breast milk of mothers whose children developed NE.

7. Liver Health

Low Plasma Zinc Is Associated with Higher Mitochondrial Oxidative Stress and Faster Liver Fibrosis Development in the Miami Adult Studies in HIV Cohort.

Oxidative stress is when levels of oxidants are high relative to levels of antioxidants. Over time, oxidative stress may cause damage to the body and increase the risk of chronic disease.

This observational study in 487 HIV-infected people, some of which had hepatitis C (liver inflammation), found that low zinc levels were associated with increased oxidative stress and liver fibrosis, which is one of the symptoms of hepatitis.

8. Bone Health

Dietary Choline Intake Is Directly Associated with Bone Mineral Density in the Hordaland Health Study.

Choline is a nutrient mainly found in animal-sourced foods, such as eggs and liver, but small amounts are also found in plants. Dietary intake of choline is not essential since the body can generally produce sufficient amounts.

This observational study in 4,632 middle-aged and older adults showed that a high dietary choline intake was associated with higher bone mineral density, possibly reducing the risk of osteoporosis.

Dairy Intake Is Protective against Bone Loss in Older Vitamin D Supplement Users: The Framingham Study.

Bone mineral density (BMD) is the amount of minerals, such as calcium, found in your bones. It tends to decrease with age. Low BMD is associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis and fractures.

This observational study in older Caucasian adults found that a higher intake of dairy, milk, yogurt and cheese was associated with greater BMD. Taking vitamin D supplements seemed to increase this protective effect of dairy.

9. Longevity and Healthy Aging
Serum 25-Hydroxyvitamin D Has a Modest Positive Association with Leukocyte Telomere Length in Middle-Aged US Adults.
Telomeres are sequences of DNA at the ends of DNA strands, which protect them from fusing with neighboring strands. They naturally shorten with age, but oxidative stress may accelerate their shortening, possibly contributing to aging.
This observational study showed that low vitamin D levels were modestly associated with a shorter telomere length in the white blood cells of middle-aged US adults.
Paleolithic and Mediterranean Diet Pattern Scores Are Inversely Associated with All-Cause and Cause-Specific Mortality in Adults.
This observational study found that following Mediterranean or Paleolithic dietary patterns was associated with a reduced risk of death from any cause.
Specifically, those who followed diets who most resembled the Mediterranean or Paleolithic diets were at a 23% reduced risk of death during the study’s six-year average follow-up.
Postdiagnostic Mediterranean and Healthy Nordic Dietary Patterns Are Inversely Associated with All-Cause Mortality in Long-Term Colorectal Cancer Survivors.
This observational study in colorectal cancer survivors found that following a Mediterranean (MD) or Nordic dietary pattern (ND) was linked to a lower risk of death from any cause during the six years of follow-up.
Specifically, those who adhered most to the MD were at a 52% lower risk of dying during the follow-up period, while closely following the ND was linked to a 37% lower risk.
Intake of Marine-Derived Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Mortality in Renal Transplant Recipients.
Intake of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), is linked to various health benefits.