This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Prebiotic supplements may reduce body fat in children.
Hazelnuts may help improve the blood lipid profile in children and adolescents with abnormally high blood lipids.
Pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate is as effective as celecoxib, an inflammatory drug, at treating osteoarthritis.
Milk appears to improve the absorption of zinc from the diet.

New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Heart Health
Cancer
Appetite and Eating
Bone Health
Arthritis
Inflammation
Infections and Immune Health
Women’s Health
Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Prebiotic Reduces Body Fat and Alters Intestinal Microbiota in Children With Overweight or Obesity.

This controlled study in Canadian children aged 7–12 investigated the effects of taking 8 grams of a prebiotic supplement once daily for four months. The prebiotic consisted of oligofructose-enriched inulin (OEI).

The study found that OEI reduced body fat by 2.4% and trunk fat by 3.8%, compared to a maltodextrin placebo. OEI also significantly reduced the inflammatory marker IL-6 and decreased triglyceride levels.

2. Heart Health

Effect of diets rich in either saturated fat or n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids and supplemented with long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on plasma lipoprotein profiles.

In this controlled study, 26 people took 400 mg of EPA and 2,000 mg of DHA for six weeks. Half of the people followed a diet high in saturated fat, while the other half followed a diet high in omega-6 fatty acids, mainly linoleic acid.

Both groups experienced significant improvements in their blood lipid profiles. Specifically, the diets decreased the concentration of triglycerides and VLDL particles, as well as VLDL and LDL particle size.

Effect of hazelnut on serum lipid profile and fatty acid composition of erythrocyte phospholipids in children and adolescents with primary hyperlipidemia: a randomized controlled trial.

This two-month controlled study in 66 children and adolescents with abnormally elevated blood lipids (hyperlipidemia) investigated the effects of eating 15–30 grams of hazelnuts per day on the blood lipid profile.

Hazelnuts reduced the levels of LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) and increased the levels of HDL cholesterol relative to LDL-C, potentially reducing the risk of heart disease. They also improved the fatty acid composition in red blood cells.

The Effect of Dairy Consumption on Lipid Profile: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.

This meta-analysis of nine controlled studies including a total of 1,102,516 women concluded that a high dairy intake increased the levels of LDL cholesterol. In contrast, it had no effects on triglycerides or HDL cholesterol.

3. Cancer

B-Vitamin Intake from Diet and Supplements and Breast Cancer Risk in Middle-Aged Women: Results from the Prospective NutriNet-Santé Cohort.

This prospective observational study in 27,853 women aged 45 or older found that a high intake of vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) was associated with a 33% lower risk of breast cancer.

A higher Dietary Inflammatory Index score is associated with a higher risk of breast cancer among Chinese women: a case-control study.

The Dietary Inflammatory Index (DII) rates the inflammatory potential of a diet. Some foods are pro-inflammatory, whereas others are anti-inflammatory or neutral.

This observational study in 1,691 Chinese women found that higher DII scores were associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.

Nut Consumption and Lung Cancer Risk: Results from Two Large Observational Studies.

This analysis of two prospective, observational studies including a total of 20,631 American adults showed that a high intake of nuts was associated with a lower risk of lung cancer.

Specifically, those who consumed the most nuts were at a 14–26% lower risk of developing lung cancer, regardless of how much they smoked.

4. Appetite and Eating

Short-term effects of a low glycemic index carob containing snack on energy intake, satiety and glycemic response in normal-weight, healthy adults. Results from two randomized-trials.

Carob trees are grown for their edible pods, which are known as carob. Carob powder is sold in many health food shops and can be used similarly to cocoa powder.

This crossover study in 50 healthy adults found that eating a carob-based snack before a meal increased satiety, decreased calorie intake and reduced the rise in blood sugar after the meal, compared to eating a pre-meal chocolate cookie.

Sugar Restriction Leads to Increased Ad Libitum Sugar Intake by Overweight Adolescents in an Experimental Test Meal Setting.

This crossover study in 87 adolescents found that sugar restriction resulted in higher sugar intake when they were subsequently given access to high-sugar foods, compared to those who were not sugar restricted.

Also, those who were the most impulsive tended to eat more sugar than those who acted with more forethought.

5. Bone Health

Carotenoid dietary intakes and plasma concentrations are associated with heel bone ultrasound attenuation and osteoporotic fracture risk in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Norfolk cohort.

Carotenoids are a class of antioxidant pigments found mainly in fruits and vegetables. The best known carotenoid is beta-carotene, which can be converted into vitamin A in the body.

This study in middle-aged adults found that a high intake of lutein and zeaxanthin was linked to a lower risk of wrist fracture in women. Alpha and beta-carotene were associated with a lower risk of hip fracture in men.

6. Arthritis

Pharmaceutical-grade Chondroitin sulfate is as effective as celecoxib and superior to placebo in symptomatic knee osteoarthritis: the ChONdroitin versus CElecoxib versus Placebo Trial (CONCEPT).

This controlled study in 604 patients with knee osteoarthritis found that taking 800 mg of high-quality, pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate (CS) for half a year reduced pain and significantly improved function, compared to a placebo.

CS was as effective as taking 200 mg of celecoxib per day. Celecoxib is a common anti-inflammatory drug used to treat knee osteoarthritis. Low-quality CS supplements may not have the same benefits.

7. Inflammation

The Effect of Dietary Glycemic Properties on Markers of Inflammation, Insulin Resistance, and Body Composition in Postmenopausal American Women: An Ancillary Study from a Multicenter Protein Supplementation Trial.

This controlled study in 84 older, postmenopausal women found that taking a whey protein supplement every day for 18 months did not affect inflammatory markers or insulin sensitivity, compared to taking a maltodextrin supplement.

However, the protein supplement was linked to increased lean mass (muscle mass).

The influence of persistent organic pollutants in the traditional Inuit diet on markers of inflammation.

The levels of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are concentrated in many marine animals that are high in the food chain, such as whales and seals. As a result, the traditional Greenland Inuit diet is high in POPs.

This observational study in Greenland Inuits found that high levels of POPs in blood samples were associated with higher levels of inflammatory markers, which are linked to an increased risk of chronic disease.

8. Infections and Immune Health

Impact of Maternal Selenium Status on Infant Outcome during the First 6 Months of Life.

Infants and pregnant women are at an increased risk of selenium deficiency, which may adversely affect brain and immune health.

This observational study in 272 women found that low selenium levels during pregnancy were linked to an increased risk of infant infection during the first six weeks of life. Their dexterity and coordination were also lower.

Vitamin D Supplementation in the Critically Ill: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Up to 50% of critically ill patients are low in vitamin D. Previous studies have associated vitamin D insufficiency with an increased risk of death and longer stays in intensive care units and hospitals.

This meta-analysis of six controlled studies concluded that vitamin D supplements do not reduce the risk of infections or death. Also, they did not affect the length of hospitalization or the time spent in intensive care units.

Immune Components in Human Milk Are Associated with Early Infant Immunological Health Outcomes: A Prospective Three-Country Analysis.

This observational study in 398 pregnant or lactating women and their children analyzed the effects of immune active molecules in breastmilk on immune health in the first year of life.

The study indicates that certain compounds in milk may protect the child against the common cold and reduce the risk of eczema or food allergies.

Tea Drinking and Its Association with Active Tuberculosis Incidence among Middle-Aged and Elderly Adults: The Singapore Chinese Health Study.

Tuberculosis (TC) is an infectious bacterial disease that usually affects the lungs, causing a fever and chronic cough with bloody phlegm.

This observational study in 63,257 Chinese people aged 45–74 showed that drinking either black or green tea daily was linked to an 18% lower risk of TC. In contrast, coffee intake was not significantly associated with TC risk.

9. Women’s Health

Vitamin D and calcium intake and risk of early menopause.

Menopause is the period in a woman’s life when she stops menstruating. It usually happens in middle-age, but about 10% of women have an early menopause (EM) before the age of 45.

This observational study found that women with the highest intake of dietary vitamin D (around 528 IU/day) were at a 17% lower risk of an EM, compared to those who had the lowest vitamin D intake (148 IU/day). Supplements had no effects.

10. Vitamins, Minerals and Other Nutrients

Upregulation of Zinc Absorption Matches Increases in Physiologic Requirements for Zinc in Women Consuming High- or Moderate-Phytate Diets during Late Pregnancy and Early Lactation.

Women’s dietary requirements for zinc increase when they are pregnant or lactating. This observational study in Guatemalan women found that the absorption of zinc from the gut increased during pregnancy and lactation.

The increase in absorption matched the increase in zinc requirements, regardless of the intake of dietary phytic acid, a compound that binds to zinc and reduces its absorption.

Zinc Absorption from Milk Is Affected by Dilution but Not by Thermal Processing, and Milk Enhances Absorption of Zinc from High-Phytate Rice in Young Dutch Women.

Previous studies suggest that milk may increase the absorption of zinc from other foods. Two crossover studies in healthy young women showed that drinking full-fat milk improved the absorption of zinc from rice by 62%, compared to water.

Ultra-high temperature treating (pasteurizing) milk did not change its beneficial effects on zinc absorption. However, diluting the milk with water reduced its effects.