This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

Probiotic supplements containing Lactobacillus rhamnosus may reduce the risk of diabetes during pregnancy.
High choline intake is associated with greater bone mineral density, potentially reducing the risk of osteoporosis.
Human milk oligosaccharides have protective effects on the digestive system in infants, especially preterm infants.
Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Appetite and Eating
Digestive Health
Liver Health
Bone Health
Longevity and Healthy Aging

1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Fruit Juice and Change in BMI: A Meta-analysis.

This meta-analysis of observational studies concluded that regularly drinking 100% fruit juice without added sugar is associated with a slightly increased risk of weight gain in children aged 1–6.

However, the authors considered the weight gain clinically insignificant. Also, no statistically significant association was found between 100% fruit juice intake and weight gain in children and adolescents aged 7–18.

2. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Higher Maternal Dietary Protein Intake Is Associated with a Higher Risk of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus in a Multiethnic Asian Cohort.

This observational study in 980 Asian women found that a higher intake of both animal and vegetable protein was associated with an increased risk of diabetes during pregnancy.

Association of maternal serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations in second and third trimester with risk of gestational diabetes and other pregnancy outcomes.

This observational study in 4,718 women showed that high circulating levels of vitamin D were associated with an increased risk of diabetes during pregnancy.

Women low in vitamin D were also at an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as stillbirth, miscarriage and anemia.

Early pregnancy probiotic supplementation with Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 may reduce the prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus: a randomised controlled trial.

This controlled study in pregnant women found that supplementing with the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus early in pregnancy may reduce the risk of diabetes during pregnancy by 69%.

However, this was only statistically significant in women aged 35 or older or those who had previously suffered from diabetes during pregnancy.

3. Heart Health

Effects of Two Different Dietary Patterns on Inflammatory Markers, Advanced Glycation End Products and Lipids in Subjects without Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomised Crossover Study.

This crossover study in 51 adults compared the effects of two, four-week diets: 1) a diet high in red, processed meat and refined grains (HMD), and 2) a diet high in dairy, whole grains, nuts and legumes (HWD).

The study showed that levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), which is a risk factor for heart disease and blood clots, were higher after the HMD. No significant differences in inflammatory markers or blood lipids were detected.

Dietary inflammatory index and risk of first myocardial infarction; a prospective population-based study.

The Dietary Inflammatory Index (DII) rates the inflammatory potential of a diet. Some foods may be pro-inflammatory, whereas others may be anti-inflammatory.

This observational study in 6,944 Swedish adults showed that a pro-inflammatory diet increased the risk of having a first heart attack in males, whereas no significant links were found in women.

4. Cancer

Supplemental Selenium May Decrease Ovarian Cancer Risk in African-American Women.

This observational study in 1,038 African-American women showed that those who supplemented with the highest amounts of selenium were at a 30% lower risk of ovarian cancer, compared to those who didn’t supplement.

However, there was no significant association between the intake of selenium from food and ovarian cancer.

Prediagnostic enterolactone concentrations and mortality among Danish men diagnosed with prostate cancer.

Enterolactone is a lignan produced by intestinal bacteria from other dietary lignans. Lignans are antioxidant polyphenols that are abundant in some high-fiber foods, such as whole grains, fruits and vegetables.

This observational study in 1,390 Danish men who were diagnosed with prostate cancer found no significant association between circulating enterolactone levels (measured before diagnosis) and the risk of death during follow-up.

Fruit and vegetable intake and breast cancer prognosis: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies.

This meta-analysis of observational studies, including a total of 41,185 women, found no significant links between the intake of fruits and vegetables and the risk of breast cancer.

5. Appetite and Eating

Hunger and satiety responses to high-fat meals after a high polyunsaturated fat diet: A Randomized Trial.

Previous single-meal studies indicate that polyunsaturated fats (PUFAs) cause a greater satiety than other types of fat. However, the long-term effects of high-PUFA diets have not been examined.

This seven-day study in 26 adults showed that a high-PUFA diet increased fasting and post-meal levels of peptide YY (PYY), which is a marker of satiety, compared to the control diet. However, the participants didn’t report any changes in their appetite.

Color of hot soup modulates postprandial satiety, thermal sensation, and body temperature in young women.

This study in 12 young women found that eating a blue potato soup significantly reduced willingness to eat and ratings of palatability, comfort, warmth and anxiety, compared to soups that were white or yellow but otherwise identical.

Additionally, self-reported satiety was lower after eating the blue soup.

6. Digestive Health

Human milk oligosaccharide composition predicts risk of necrotising enterocolitis in preterm infants.

Necrotising enterocolitis (NE) is one of the most common intestinal disorders in preterm infants. The risk of death among infants with NE is quite high. Breastfed infants are at a significantly lower risk of NE than those who are formula fed.

This observational study in 200 mothers and their infants showed that the levels of disialyllacto-N-tetraose, a type of human milk oligosaccharide, were significantly lower in the breast milk of mothers whose children developed NE.

7. Liver Health

Low Plasma Zinc Is Associated with Higher Mitochondrial Oxidative Stress and Faster Liver Fibrosis Development in the Miami Adult Studies in HIV Cohort.

Oxidative stress is when levels of oxidants are high relative to levels of antioxidants. Over time, oxidative stress may cause damage to the body and increase the risk of chronic disease.

This observational study in 487 HIV-infected people, some of which had hepatitis C (liver inflammation), found that low zinc levels were associated with increased oxidative stress and liver fibrosis, which is one of the symptoms of hepatitis.

8. Bone Health

Dietary Choline Intake Is Directly Associated with Bone Mineral Density in the Hordaland Health Study.

Choline is a nutrient mainly found in animal-sourced foods, such as eggs and liver, but small amounts are also found in plants. Dietary intake of choline is not essential since the body can generally produce sufficient amounts.

This observational study in 4,632 middle-aged and older adults showed that a high dietary choline intake was associated with higher bone mineral density, possibly reducing the risk of osteoporosis.

Dairy Intake Is Protective against Bone Loss in Older Vitamin D Supplement Users: The Framingham Study.

Bone mineral density (BMD) is the amount of minerals, such as calcium, found in your bones. It tends to decrease with age. Low BMD is associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis and fractures.

This observational study in older Caucasian adults found that a higher intake of dairy, milk, yogurt and cheese was associated with greater BMD. Taking vitamin D supplements seemed to increase this protective effect of dairy.

9. Longevity and Healthy Aging
Serum 25-Hydroxyvitamin D Has a Modest Positive Association with Leukocyte Telomere Length in Middle-Aged US Adults.
Telomeres are sequences of DNA at the ends of DNA strands, which protect them from fusing with neighboring strands. They naturally shorten with age, but oxidative stress may accelerate their shortening, possibly contributing to aging.
This observational study showed that low vitamin D levels were modestly associated with a shorter telomere length in the white blood cells of middle-aged US adults.
Paleolithic and Mediterranean Diet Pattern Scores Are Inversely Associated with All-Cause and Cause-Specific Mortality in Adults.
This observational study found that following Mediterranean or Paleolithic dietary patterns was associated with a reduced risk of death from any cause.
Specifically, those who followed diets who most resembled the Mediterranean or Paleolithic diets were at a 23% reduced risk of death during the study’s six-year average follow-up.
Postdiagnostic Mediterranean and Healthy Nordic Dietary Patterns Are Inversely Associated with All-Cause Mortality in Long-Term Colorectal Cancer Survivors.
This observational study in colorectal cancer survivors found that following a Mediterranean (MD) or Nordic dietary pattern (ND) was linked to a lower risk of death from any cause during the six years of follow-up.
Specifically, those who adhered most to the MD were at a 52% lower risk of dying during the follow-up period, while closely following the ND was linked to a 37% lower risk.
Intake of Marine-Derived Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Mortality in Renal Transplant Recipients.
Intake of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), is linked to various health benefits.
This observational study in 627 kidney transplant recipients showed that a high intake of EPA and DHA was associated with a lower risk of death from any cause, especially in older and non-smoking individuals.