This is our weekly selection of recently published studies and reviews in nutrition. Here are some of the most interesting findings this week:

While moderate coffee consumption may benefit heart health, too much may be detrimental.
A high magnesium intake is associated with a lower risk of hypertension.
Drinking purple grape juice may temporarily improve attention and mood.
New Research From Around the World

Lots of recent papers came to our attention this week. Here are summaries of the most interesting or relevant studies, categorized by subject.

Obesity and Weight Loss
Metabolic Syndrome
Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes
Heart Health
Cancer
Appetite and Eating
Brain and Mental Health
Eyes and Vision
1. Obesity and Weight Loss

Polyphenol Levels Are Inversely Correlated with Body Weight and Obesity in an Elderly Population after 5 Years of Follow Up (The Randomised PREDIMED Study).

Polyphenols are a large group of antioxidants found in most plant-derived foods. A high intake of polyphenol-rich foods has been linked to a variety of health benefits.

This observational study in 573 older adults at a high risk of heart disease found that a high intake of polyphenols was associated with lower body weight, body mass index and waist circumference.

2. Metabolic Syndrome

Very-long-chain ω-3 fatty acid supplements and adipose tissue functions: a randomized controlled trial.

Long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, especially docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), may benefit patients with metabolic syndrome, possibly through their effects on fat tissue function.

This controlled study in 21 insulin resistant adults showed that taking supplements containing 3.9 g of DHA and EPA for half a year had no beneficial effects on fat breakdown or inflammation in fat cells.

3. Blood Sugar Control and Diabetes

Soyfood and isoflavone intake and risk of type 2 diabetes in Vietnamese adults.

This observational study in 1,198 Vietnamese adults found that a high intake of soy foods was linked to a lower risk of type 2 diabetes. Those with the highest intake were 69% less likely to be diabetic.

4. Heart Health

Effect of nut consumption on vascular endothelial function: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

The inner lining of the blood vessels is called endothelium. When the endothelium is dysfunctional, the blood vessels are either too narrow or too dilated. Narrow blood vessels increase blood pressure and the risk of heart disease.

This meta-analysis of controlled studies concluded that eating nuts improved endothelial function (ED). However, when different nut types were studied separately, only walnuts benefited ED.

Chocolate Consumption and Risk of Heart Failure: A Meta-Analysis of Prospective Studies.

This meta-analysis of observational studies including a total of 106,109 participants concluded that moderate chocolate consumption may reduce the risk of heart failure.

A Mediterranean diet lowers blood pressure and improves endothelial function: results from the MedLey randomized intervention trial.

Numerous studies have linked the Mediterranean diet (MD) to a reduced risk of chronic disease. The MD is a dietary pattern high in vegetables, fruits, whole grains, olive oil, seafood and fish.

This controlled study in 166 older adults showed that following the MD for half a year reduced systolic blood pressure and endothelial function. Although the change was small, it was statistically significant.

J-shaped relationship between habitual coffee consumption and 10-year (2002–2012) cardiovascular disease incidence: the ATTICA study.

This prospective observational study in 2,583 healthy adults found that low to moderate consumption of coffee was associated with a reduced risk of heart disease.

Drinking less than 150 ml daily was linked to a 56% reduced risk of heart disease, while drinking 150–250 ml per day was associated with a 51% lower risk. However, more than 250 ml per day was linked to a 148% higher risk of heart disease.

Dose-response relationship between dietary magnesium intake, serum magnesium concentration and risk of hypertension: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies.

This meta-analysis of 10 observational studies including a total of 180,566 participants concluded that a high intake of magnesium reduces the risk of abnormally high blood pressure (hypertension).

Those with the highest magnesium intake were at an 8% reduced risk of hypertension, compared to those with the lowest intake. Each 100 mg-dose of magnesium per day was estimated to lower the risk by 5%.

5. Cancer

Processed Meat and Colorectal Cancer Risk: A Pooled Analysis of Three Italian Case-Control Studies.

This observational study in Italian adults found that a high intake of processed meat (PM) was associated with an increased risk of cancer in the first section of the colon. However, PM intake was not linked to colon cancer overall.

Specifically, those who consumed the most PM, or more than 22–25 grams per day, were at a 38% increased risk.

Meat intake and risk of colorectal polyps: results from a large population-based screening study in Germany.

This observational study in 15,950 German adults aged 55 and older found no significant links between meat intake and colon cancer. However, the study detected a significant association between meat intake and cancer in the rectum.

Dietary patterns and colorectal cancer risk in middle-aged adults: a large population-based prospective cohort study.

This observational study followed 93,062 middle-aged, Japanese adults for 14–17 years. It found that a healthier, “prudent” dietary pattern was associated with a lower risk of colorectal cancer, compared to a Westernized dietary pattern.

The study found no significant associations between the traditional Japanese diet and the risk of colorectal cancer.

6. Appetite and Eating

Effects of whole grain rye, with and without resistant starch type 2 supplementation, on glucose tolerance, gut hormones, inflammation and appetite regulation in an 11–14.5 hour perspective; a randomized controlled study in healthy subjects.

This crossover study in 21 healthy people showed that eating a meal of whole-grain rye bread increased satiety and reduced the desire to eat, compared to white flour bread.

Additionally, whole-grain rye bread with added rye kernels and resistant starch decreased the rise in blood sugar and insulin after the meal. However, it had no effects on inflammatory markers or later calorie intake.

7. Brain and Mental Health

Cognitive and mood improvements following acute supplementation with purple grape juice in healthy young adults.

This controlled study in 20 healthy young adults showed that drinking 7.8 ounces (230 ml) of purple grape juice temporarily increased measures of attention and calmness, compared to a placebo.

Association between maternal intake of n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratio during pregnancy and infant neurodevelopment at 6 months of age: results of the MOCEH cohort study.

A high ratio of omega-6 to omega-3, which is typical of the Western diet, has been associated with adverse health effects.

This observational study showed that when mothers have a high ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids in their diet, their children’s neuro and cognitive development tends to be poorer at six months of age, compared to those with a low ratio.

Associations of lower vitamin D concentrations with cognitive decline and long-term risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in older adults.

This observational study followed 916 older French adults for 12 years. It found that a low vitamin D status may contribute to mental decline, as well as that adequate vitamin D intake may slow or delay dementia, especially Alzheimer’s disease.

Vitamin D deficiency was linked to a three-fold increase in the risk of Alzheimer’s disease.

Fish consumption, intake of fats and cognitive decline at middle and older age: the Doetinchem Cohort Study.

This five-year prospective observational study in 2,612 adults aged 43–70 found no consistent links between fatty fish intake and mental function.

However, it showed that a higher cholesterol intake was associated with a faster cognitive decline, as well as that a higher intake of omega-3 fatty acids, especially alpha-linolenic acid, was linked to a slower decline in cognitive function and memory.

8. Eyes and Vision

The Effect of a Mediterranean Diet on the Incidence of Cataract Surgery.

Cataracts are one of the most common eye diseases worldwide. Eye surgery is the only available treatment.

This controlled study in 5,802 adults aged 55–80 showed that following the Mediterranean diet, either enriched with nuts or extra-virgin olive oil, had no significant effects on the risk of developing a cataract, compared to a placebo.

Dietary intake of α-linolenic acid and risk of age-related macular degeneration.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is an eye disease that is a major cause of vision loss and blindness among Americans. The risk of AMD increases with age.

This observational study in 38,961 American women found that a high intake of α-linolenic acid (ALA) was associated with AMD before 2002, when trans-ALA was found in food. ALA intake was not significantly linked to AMD after 2002.