Abstract Introduction Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a condition characterized by a number of behavioral, psychological and physical symptoms recurring cyclically during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. The uncertainty in the pathogenesis of PMS has led to many treatment protocols being suggested as possible therapies. The present study was carried out to compare the effects of echinophora-platyloba and fennel extracts on the PMS against placebo in students of Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences in 2008. Methods In this single-blind randomized clinical trial, 90 students with moderate to severe PMS enrolled in the study and were randomely divided into three equal groups. The first group received echinophora-platyloba extract, the second group received fennel extracts and the third group received placebo. The severity of PMS was measured by Daily Record of Severity of Problems (DRSP) questionnaire at the end of the first and second menstrual cycles before the intervention and the results were compared with them after the intervention. Data was analyzed using Dunn, Kruskal Wallis, and Pearson correlation tests by SPSS (v. 11.5) and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Results There were not any significant differences in the means of premenstrual syndrome scores before the intervention among the three groups (100.8±22.1 in echinophora-platyloba group, 101.3±27.1 in fennel group and 104.3±19.5 in placebo group, p > 0.05), but the differences were significant after the intervention (49.7±23.2 in echinophora-platyloba group, 64.4±27.5 in fennel group and 79.1±28.1 in placebo group, respectively, p < 0.001). No significant differences were seen between the echinophora-platyloba and fennel groups. Conclusion The echinophora-platyloba and fennel extracts could reduce the severity of PMS. The effects of echinophora-platyloba and fennel were similar and greater than the placebo. Administration of the extracts of these herbs is suggested for relieving the signs and symptoms of PMS.