Abstract BACKGROUND: Frequent use of antibiotics to stimulate growth and health of animals leads to the development of antibiotic-resistant populations of microorganisms. In this context, alternatives like herbs and spices to antibiotics are of importance, as they are natural products. Therefore, the present experiment was designed to evaluate the performance, carcass traits, hematology and serum biochemical parameters of broilers fed ration containing varying levels of Lepidium satvium (Garden cress) seed powder as feed additive up to the age of 42 days. METHODS: A total of 204 Cobb-500 day-old broiler chicks were randomly distributed into four treatments with three replicates of 17 chicks each. Garden cress (GC) was included in the ration at 0 (0GC), 0.75 (0.75GC), 1.50 (1.5GC) and 2.25 % (2.25GC) in each treatments. Growth performance, carcass characteristics, heamatology, serum biochemical and economic efficiency parameters were observed. RESULTS: The crude protein, ether extract and crude fiber content of GC were 22.4, 25.7 and 10.5 %, respectively. Daily dry matter intake and average daily gain during the entire experimental period were affected (p < 0.01) by the treatment diet. Dry matter intake increased with increasing GC level in the ration. Average daily gain for the entire period was greater (p < 0.005) for 0.75 and 1.5GC than 0 and 2.25GC. Groups consumed GC containing ration had better (p < 0.004) drumstick percentage. However, most carcass parts and giblet weight were not affected (p > 0.05). Sex differences were significant for eviscerated, carcass and kidney percentages with greater values for females than males. All hematological parameters were within the normal range. However, inclusion of GC improved (p < 0.05) hemoglobin, packed cell volume and red blood cell count. Group consumed GC containing ration exhibited significant decrease in serum glucose, triglycerides and cholesterol concentration. CONCLUSION: Inclusion of GC up to 2.25 % result in no any adverse effect on the health of broilers. Based on the production parameters used in the study, GC can be included as feed additive at a level of 0.75 % in the total ration for better and positive results on biological performance and health status of broilers.