Abstract Importance Because deposition of cerebral beta amyloid (Aβ) appears to be a key initiating event in Alzheimer’s disease, factors associated with increased deposition are of great interest. Whether or not elevated serum cholesterol acts as such a factor is unknown. Objective To investigate the relationship between serum cholesterol levels and cerebral Aβ during life, early in the AD process. Design Cross sectional analysis of potential associations between contemporaneously measured total serum cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and cerebral Aβ, measured using PIB PET. Setting Multi-site, university medical center based study of vascular contributions to dementia. Participants 74 persons, mean age 78, recruited via direct outreach in stroke clinics and community senior facilities following a protocol designed to obtain a cohort enriched for cerebrovascular disease and elevated vascular risk. Three cases had mild dementia. All others were clinically normal (33 cases) or had mild cognitive impairment (38 cases). Results Cerebral Aβ was quantified using a global PIB index, which averages PIB retention in cortical areas prone to amyloidosis. Statistical models that controlled for age and the apoE ε4 allele showed independent associations between LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and PIB index. Higher LDL and lower HDL were both associated with higher PIB index. No association was found between total cholesterol and PIB index. No association was found between statin use and PIB index, nor did controlling for cholesterol treatment in the statistical models alter the basic findings. Conclusions and Relevance Elevated cerebral Aβ was associated with cholesterol fractions in a pattern analogous to that found in coronary artery disease. This finding, in living, non-demented humans, is consistent with prior autopsy reports, with epidemiological findings, and with both animal and in vitro work suggesting an important role for cholesterol in Aβ processing. Because cholesterol levels are modifiable, understanding their link to amyloid deposition could potentially and eventually have impact in retarding the pathological cascade of AD. These findings suggest that understanding the mechanisms through which serum lipids modulate Aβ could offer new approaches to slowing Aβ deposition and thus to reducing the incidence of AD.